PUBG MOBILE
Top Battle Royale Mobile Game

1.6M RATINGS

4.3
*****

AGE RATING

13+
Years

CHART

#14
Strategy

DEVELOPER

Tencent Mobile International Limited

LANGUAGE

EN
+ 12 More

SIZE

3.9
GB


[Epic battle royale masterpiece]
Lots of events for you to explore.Climb to the top in PUBG MOBILE and fire at will. PUBG MOBILE is the original battle royale game on mobile and
one of the best mobile shooting games.

[Extreme battles in 10-minute matches ]
Prepare your firearms, respond to the call for battle in PUBG MOBILE, and fire at will.

[Tons of maps and modes ]
PUBG MOBILE has many maps and gameplay mechanics that give you a thrilling survival experience. Find your friends and play the new modes
together! Play however you like and fire at will!

[Play anytime, anywhere]
Relax and play PUBG MOBILE to your heart's content! Enjoy the smoothest gunplay for an unparalleled gameplay experience.

[Made especially for mobile phones]
Features customizable controls, training mode, and voice chat with friends. Experience the smoothest control experience and the most realistic
firearms on your phone.

PUBG MOBILE has the highest fidelity items and gameplay experience. PUBG MOBILE can fulfill any wish you might have. Choose from countless
firearms and test your marksmanship. New items, maps, and modes are constantly being added to the game.

PUBG MOBILE offers the most intense multiplayer battles on your mobile phone. Join the battle, gear up, and play to win. Survive in epic 100-
player battles in Classic Mode, Payload, fast-paced 4v4 Arena battles, and Infection Mode. Survival is all that matters. Be the last one standing.
Accept missions and fire at will!
Compatible Models: All models with at least an Apple A8 chip (iPhone 6 or newer, iPad Air 2 or newer, iPad mini 4 or newer, iPod Touch 6 or
newer, all iPad Pro models).
Incompatible Models: All models using an Apple A7 chip or older (iPhone 5s or older, iPad Air or older, iPad Mini 3 or older, iPod Touch 5 or older).

[Follow us]
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/pubgmobile
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/PUBGMOBILE
Twitter: https://twitter.com/PUBGMobile
Youtube: https://www.youtube.com/pubgmobile
Tiktok: https://www.tiktok.com/@pubgmobile
Reddit: https://www.reddit.com/r/PUBGMobile/
Discord: https://discord.gg/pubgmobile
Please contact customer service if you encounter any problems: service@pubgmobile.com

Please read PUBG MOBILE's Privacy Policy and User Agreement
Privacy Policy: http://pubgmobile.proximabeta.com/privacy.html
Tencent Games User Agreement: https://www.pubgmobile.com/terms.html
X

Need assistance from an expert .

11/13/2020
CharleyMTZ

I'm not the kind of person to EVER write a review . So count this as serious please. It's so
rare but Literally love the game, been playing it for quite a few years now and this game
seems to not fail in how good it keeps on getting BUT there's also a few other catches
that bother me for instance of how much data it consumes after just a single battle and
despite having unlimited data and good signal is still decides to boot me out and it gets
so frustrating. Also after this new update I've questioned if it's a bug that literally when I
try to send team recruitment nothing seems to appear like if no one is in my server
despite that I play in one of the biggest servers in North America. Once I logged in like 3
or sometimes 1 team recruitment appear in my log but after that I get NONE. I've tried to
restart the game and log out but did not help. It's so boring not being able to find other
global people to play with so that's probably one of the reasons why I haven't played
much and having a bunch of bugs. They have done a pretty good job with hackers but
also count the people that try to kill you in the matches and still deducts points but
anyways enough with the rant but There's no doubt for the 5 star rating but this makes
me just to turn down one star in the performance that has been going lately with my
account. I play in IPhone 11 Pro so I doubt that is my device. Support from a specialist will
be great at this point, atleast if they count me in .

Fun game, needs minor changes

11/08/2018
briannaa1

My biggest issue with the game is that I normally can't find anyone who speaks the same
language as me, so it's harder to communicate in game play. I think there should be an
option where we can choose to play with people who are only from our country/speak the
same language. I know there's already the option of finding people who speak the same
language, but that's also iffy because you can't choose both languages to be whatever
language you speak. For example i only speak english and i have to choose to find people
who speak english and one other different language. That's just something that irks me
because I don't know any other languages and there's no way to put it so I can be with
those who only speak english as well. Another thing I think should be added is how the
footsteps sound. I think there should be a sort of perk we can find where it silences your
footsteps, but the enemy can still see the footsteps on the map, just can't hear them. It's
still an advantage for both parties. Another thing is with the cars, I think there should be
more window security because you can easily be shot through the car with no windows ..
and that's no fun right? I also think when you find a car you should be able to have a gas
can right next to it because finding a gas can in a house is pretty hard. And I think there
could be different models of cars added! Like a truck for example. That's just what I think
though! I hope this can be seen and taken into consideration, thank you!
So I've played PUBG (counting console and mobile) for nearly 4 years and I've loved
every minute of playing! PUBG is such a fun game to play either by yourself or with
friends. I'm such a big PUBG fan that I bought a poster and keychains of it! I love how
realistic the gameplay is, and the graphics are amazing. Like I said in the title, I LOVE
PUBG! -- Edit: I received a developer response, and I noticed it said to give out some
suggestions for PUBG, and I couldn't really come up with much besides one little
problem. The "problem" I have with PUBG is the recovery time from walk to sprint, like
when I open a door or mantle then I get stuck in walk for a minute. Honestly I don't
know if it's just me and I'm doing something wrong with the controls, but with games
say like Warface (which is kind of similar vaulting wise) I don't have the same problem
after I mantle/vault. I understand Warface is not PUBG, but I would love it if the
vaulting and mantling was the same. Update: I'm so sorry for the complaint about the
recovery sprint time, I had the idea to turn up a setting that allows me to sprint just like
I wanted and it worked. 5 stars PUBG !-- Update: Please help, I deleted PUBG Mobile
to free up some storage, and when I redownloaded it I had no data. I don't know if I
played with a guest account the whole time, but I remember that I had some good
cosmetics. Also my profile says I first played two months ago, and I really first played
PUBG mobile four years ago. PLEASE help,
What's New >

The first ancient Greek myth-themed version, Hero's Crown is here! Conquer the four temple areas, complete five glorious trials, and recruit the centaur ally
to fight alongside you!

Battle Royale
1. New Themed Mode: Four Mysterious Areas x Five New Trials -> Challenge and recruit the centaur ally, and conquer the Crown's Abode.
2. Returning Themed Mode: Dinoground is back after three years!
3. Classic Mode: The 2-seater convertible Roadster is here with turbocharged speed.
New Collaborations
BLUE LOCK, Harley-Davidson, Ford, and more collaborations are coming soon! Stay tuned!
World of Wonder
Standalone Lobby (Swipe left to access) + Join matches in progress -> Seamlessly find maps and team up.
App Privacy >

The developer, Tencent Mobile International Limited, indicated that the app's privacy practices may include handling of data as described
below. For more information, see the developer's privacy policy.

Data Used to Track You

The following data may be used to track
you across apps and websites owned by
other companies:

User Content

Data Linked to You

The following data may be collected and
linked to your identity:

Contact Info

Identifiers

User Content

Diagnostics

Data Not Linked to You

The following data may be collected but it
is not linked to your identity:

ill Usage Data

Privacy practices may vary, for example, based on the features you use or your age. Learn More

Accessibility

The developer has not yet indicated which accessibility features this app supports. Learn More
Accessibility

The developer has not yet indicated which accessibility features this app supports. Learn More

Information

Seller
Tencent Mobile International Limited

Compatibility
Requires iOS 13.0 or later. V

In-App Purchases
Yes V

Size
3.9 GB

Category
Action

Languages
English and 12 more V

Copyright
Shenzhen Tencent Computer Systems Company Limited

Age Rating
13+ V