Instagram
Videos, creators & friends
Free • In-App Purchases

Little moments lead to big friendships. Share yours on Instagram.
- From Meta

Connect with friends, find other fans, and see what people around you are up to and into. Explore your interests and post what's going on, from your daily moments to life's
highlights.

Share what you're up to and into:
- Turn your life into a movie and discover short, entertaining videos on Instagram with Reels.
- Keep up with friends on the fly with Stories and Notes that disappear after 24 hours.
- Start group chats and share unfiltered moments with your Close Friends.
- Share memories from recent events or trips in Feed.
- Customize your posts with exclusive templates, music, stickers and filters.

Dive into your interests.
- Watch videos from your favorite creators and discover new content that's personalized to your interests.
- Get inspired by photos and videos from new accounts in Explore.
- Discover brands and small businesses, and shop products that are relevant to your personal style.

Some Instagram features may not be available in your country or region.

Terms and Policies: https://help.instagram.com/581066165581870

Consumer Health Privacy Policy: https://privacycenter.instagram.com/policies/health

Learn how we're working to help keep our communities safe across Meta technologies at the Instagram Safety Center: https://about.instagram.com/safety


What's New >

Performance optimizations and stability improvements for a smoother, more reliable experience.

App Privacy

The developer, Instagram, Inc., indicated that the app's privacy practices may include handling of data as described below. For more information, see the developer's
privacy policy.

Data Used to Track You
The following data may be used to track you across
apps and websites owned by other companies:

Contact Info

Other Data

Identifiers

Data Linked to You
The following data may be collected and linked to
your identity:

Health & Fitness

Financial Info

Contact Info

User Content

Browsing History

Usage Data

Diagnostics

Purchases

Location

Contacts

Search History

Identifiers

Sensitive Info

Other Data

Privacy practices may vary, for example, based on the features you use or your age. Learn More

Accessibility

The developer has not yet indicated which accessibility features this app supports. Learn More

Information

Seller
Instagram, Inc.

Compatibility
Requires iOS 16.3 or later. 

Size
563.6 MB

Category
Photo & Video

Age Rating
13+

Size
563.6 MB

Location
This app may use your location even when it isn't open, which can decrease device
battery life.

In-App Purchases
Yes 

Category
Photo & Video

Languages
English and 30 more

Copyright
2018 Instagram, LLC.
 


