Endpoint compliance in coupled tendon-driven long-reach articulated arm ‘Super Dragon’

ABSTRACT
For decommissioning work at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station, internal investigation using long-reach articulated arms is required. Inside the reactor, it is difficult to completely understand the situation, in advance avoid contact with obstacles. The coupled tendon-driven articulated arm 'Super Dragon' can achieve high endpoint compliance without special control thanks to the elasticity of synthetic fiber ropes used for driving, making it highly adaptable to unknown environments for investigation purposes. This paper aims to demonstrate the high environmental adaptability of coupled tendon-driven arms. We showed the arm's endpoint compliance through numerical analysis and hardware experiments. Furthermore, leveraging this compliance, we achieved external contact detection using measured tension and joint torque decrease.

GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT

Keywords: Long-reach articulated arm, coupled tendon drive, endpoint compliance, synthetic fiber rope

1. Introduction
For the decommissioning work of the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station, internal investigation of the Primary Containment Vessel (PCV) is required. To achieve internal investigation of the PCV, which is a high-radiation area, an investigation method has been proposed where an articulated arm equipped with investigation equipment at the tip penetrates into the PCV for exploration, and various articulated arms have been developed [Citation1–5]. In this method, the arm is required to be long-reach and slim to pass through narrow spaces and investigate vast areas, as well as have a large payload to carry investigation equipment.

We believe that adaptability to unknown environments is necessary in addition to these conditions. While typical robotic arm exploration work requires precise control to avoid obstacles, in PCV investigation, it is difficult to avoid contact with the external environment as the internal situation cannot be grasped in advance. Therefore, we consider that an articulated arm with a certain degree of compliance would be useful to prevent damage when the arm contacts the external environment. However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no prior studies on articulated arms for decommissioning work that focus on adaptability during external contact.

We have developed Super Dragon, a coupled tendon-driven super long-reach articulated arm [Citation6–10]. Generally, as robot arms become longer, their mass increases, making it difficult to develop arms that are both long-reach and slim. However, coupled tendon drive can achieve long-reach, lightweight, and large payload by placing actuators at the base and supporting the root joints, which apply the largest gravity torque, through coupled drive [Citation11]. In this paper, in addition to these advantages, we focus on the feature that compliance can be achieved without special control due to the elasticity of the synthetic fiber ropes used for driving. In the literature, Series Elastic Actuators (SEAs) intentionally incorporate elastic elements into actuators to achieve compliance through mechanical elasticity rather than active actuator control [Citation12]. SEAs improve impact resistance by low-pass filtering impact loads through their elastic elements, and this effectiveness has been verified using a geared motor incorporating a torsion spring as the elastic element. In our case, we believe that long-path synthetic fiber ropes, such as those used in this study, can also serve as elastic elements. In other words, it is considered possible to allow contact between the arm itself and the external environment while penetrating without destroying the arm. Furthermore, since the base is equipped with tension sensors for the driving tendons, we believe that contact with the external environments can be detected without special equipment by utilizing the change in tension during external contact. Moreover, if contact between the arm and the external environment is allowed, it is considered possible to reduce joint torque by intentionally contact the arm to the external environment to support the gravity. In other words, there is a possibility of achievement of operations that intentionally exploit contact between the arm and the external environment.

Therefore, this paper aims to demonstrate the high external environment adaptability of coupled tendon-driven arms in unknown environments. First, we will show through analysis and hardware experiments that coupled tendon-driven arms have high compliance due to the elongation of driving tendons. Additionally, by comparing analytical and measured values, we discuss the extent to which the analysis can be applied. Then, through hardware experiments, we will achieve three points: contact with the external environment without damage to the arm or obstacles, the possibility of detecting external contact, and operations that utilize external contact.

2. Super Dragon
This section explains the coupled tendon drive, which is the driving method of Super Dragon, and the hardware, respectively.

2.1. Coupled tendon drive
Coupled tendon drive is a driving method for long-reach manipulators proposed by Hirose et al. which drives each joint using tendons such as metal wires or ropes [Citation11]. A figure shows a coupled tendon-driven manipulator composed of three joints. The joint located closest to the base is called the 1st joint, and from there toward the tip, they are called the 2nd joint, 3rd joint, and so on.

Each joint has a pulley fixed to the link (hereinafter driving pulley), to which the end of the tendon driving that joint is fixed. Tendons driving joints on the tip side are wound around joints on the base side via freely rotating pulleys (hereinafter torque transmission pulleys). When all pulley radii are equal to r and each tendon is pulled with force F, the torques generated at each joint are τ1=3Fr, τ2=2Fr, and τ3=Fr from the base, respectively. Thus, joints closer to the base, which require larger torque to support gravity, have more tendons wound around them, enabling the generation of larger torque. Furthermore, by mounting the actuators that pull the tendons at the base rather than on the arm, the arm portion can be made lightweight. In this way, coupled tendon drive is suitable as a driving method for long-reach manipulators because it can support the arm's gravity with the tension of multiple tendons.

2.2. Hardware
We explain the hardware configuration of Super Dragon. Super Dragon is a coupled tendon-driven manipulator with an arm length of 10 m, maximum arm diameter of 0.2 m, and 10 joints [Citation6–10]. The arrangement of joints, tendons, and pulleys of Super Dragon is shown. In this paper, we define yaw joints whose axes coincide with the vertical direction when the arm is extended horizontally, and pitch joints whose axes are horizontal and perpendicular to the longitudinal direction. We consider an xyz coordinate system, with the vertically upward direction as the positive z-axis direction, and the direction from the base to the tip when the arm takes a horizontal posture as the positive x-axis direction. This arm consists of pitch joints and yaw joints, enabling three-dimensional motion through three-dimensional coupled tendon drive. Tendons driving pitch joints are shown in pink, and tendons driving yaw joints are shown in cyan. Additionally, Horigome et al. proposed a gravity compensation mechanism for arms using large-diameter tendons introduced separately from the coupled tendon drive system, which Super Dragon adopts [Citation14]. This method compensates for most of the gravity by winding a large-diameter tendon shown in orange around pitch joints and pulling it with actuators with large generating force such as pneumatic cylinders, in addition to the tendons that control each joint. In this paper, we refer to the small-diameter tendons that control joints as joint control tendons and the large-diameter tendons that compensate for gravity as gravity compensation tendons.

The joint control tendons use 2 mm diameter ropes (NA20020SOC00\001.000, Armare) made of high-density polyethylene with heat-set. For gravity compensation tendons, 5.5 mm diameter PBO fiber rope (ZB-15728, Hayami Industry) is used, wound from the 1st joint to the 5th joint. Each joint is equipped with a potentiometer (JC10-000-103N, Nidec Copal Electronics), allowing the arm's posture to be acquired at each control cycle. The base is equipped with gear-head electromagnetic motors (241322, Maxon Motor) that pull the joint control tendons, pneumatic cylinders (10A-2FB200B300, TAIYO) that pull the gravity compensation tendons, tension sensors, and other electrical systems. Joint angle control is performed by PI control of the winding amount of joint control tendons, and for gravity compensation tendons, PI control of the pressure value of the pneumatic cylinders that apply tension is performed. Super Dragon can generate high joint torque due to the characteristics of coupled tendon drive, which enables arm weight reduction and allows the arm's self-weight to be cooperatively supported by multiple tendons. For example, in an experiment maintaining a horizontal posture with a tip payload of 10 kg, 1st joint achieved a high joint torque of 2797 Nm.

3. Measurement of endpoint compliance
This section demonstrates that Super Dragon has endpoint compliance due to the elasticity of driving tendons. First, we analytically show the compliance ellipsoid of the tip position, then measure the compliance value using the actual hardware and compare it with the analytical solution.

3.1. Derivation of endpoint compliance ellipsoid
Let the tip position of Super Dragon in equilibrium state be xe ∈ R3×1, and the reaction force to its small displacement Δxe be Δfe ∈ R3×1. Then, we define the stiffness coefficient matrix Kx ∈ R3×3 of the arm tip by the following equation:
Δfe = −Kx Δxe (1)

Next, we define each joint torque of Super Dragon as τ ∈ R10×1 and each rope tension as f ∈ R21×1. We also define joint control tendon tension and gravity compensation tendon tension as fj ∈ R20×1 and fwc ∈ R, respectively. We define the pulley matrix Rj ∈ R10×20 regarding the pulley diameter and winding direction of joint control tendons. The component r_{i,j} in the i-th row and j-th column of the pulley matrix represents the radius of the pulley around which rope j placed at the i-th joint is wound. The two ropes driving the n-th joint are designated as rope 2n−1 and rope 2n, wound to change the driven joint in negative and positive rotation directions, respectively. The radius of pulleys wound in the negative direction is taken as a negative value. Similarly, defining the pulley matrix for gravity compensation tendons as Rwc ∈ R10×1, the joint torque τ can be calculated as:
τ = R f = [Rj Rwc] [fj; fwc] (2)

Since the path length of joint control tendons changes by −Rj^T θ due to joint angle changes, the elongation of joint control tendons is calculated as φ r_reel − Rj^T θ from the winding reel angle φ ∈ R20×1 and reel radius r_reel ∈ R. Therefore, using the stiffness matrix K ∈ R20×20 of joint control tendons, the tension fj of rope j is calculated as:
fj = K (φ r_reel − Rj^T θ) (3)

From Equations (2) and (3), the generated torque Δτ when giving a small displacement Δθ to joint angle θ can be calculated as Equation (4):
Δτ = −Rj K Rj^T Δθ (4)

However, assuming that the motors pulling the joint control tendons are stopped, the winding reel angle φ ∈ R20×1 is constant. Also, we assume that the gravity compensation tendon tension fwc does not depend on Δθ. Using the Jacobian matrix J, the relationship between Δxe and Δθ is expressed by the following equation:
Δxe = J Δθ (5)

From Equations (1), (4), (5) and Equation (6) derived from the principle of virtual work, Equation (7) is derived:
Δτ^T Δθ = Δfe^T Δxe (6)
Kx = (J^T)^+ Rj K Rj^T J^+ (7)

Where J ∈ R^{m×n} is the Jacobian matrix, and J^+, (J^T)^+ are the pseudo-inverse matrices of J and J^T, respectively. In redundant arms, generally m<n, so pseudo-inverse matrices need to be used; however, the pseudo-inverse matrices used in Equation (7) are not the most commonly used Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse matrices. Since the row vectors of J are linearly independent and it is a wide matrix, there are infinitely many solutions to Equation (5). One solution, θ = J^+ Δxe becomes the minimum norm solution when using the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse matrix. Since each joint stiffness differs in coupled tendon-driven arms, we use the Lagrange multiplier method to find the solution Δθ to Equation (5) that minimizes the sum of elastic energy E_sum of each joint angle control tendon, thereby calculating the pseudo-inverse matrix. E_sum is as follows: Where Δθ_j is the j-th row component of Δθ, and K_i represents the stiffness of rope i.

E_sum = sum_{i=1}^{n} (1/2 K_{2i-1} (sum_{j=1}^{i} r_{j,2i-1} Δθ_j)^2 + 1/2 K_{2i} (sum_{j=1}^{i} r_{j,2i} Δθ_j)^2 ) (8)

In this paper, we consider the endpoint compliance ellipsoid of Super Dragon in horizontal posture (θ = 0). Unlike general postures, the horizontal posture is a singular posture, so the endpoint compliance has no component in the longitudinal direction, i.e. the x-axis direction. Therefore, the endpoint compliance ellipsoid in horizontal posture becomes a two-dimensional ellipse that can be drawn in yz coordinates. Here, we ignore the influence of gravity compensation tendons because the base-side joints where gravity compensation tendons are wound have high joint stiffness due to many tendons being wound around them, resulting in relatively small joint angle changes at the base side when displacement. We assume that the elastic coefficient of joint control tendons is constant regardless of elongation, and set the elastic coefficient per unit strain as k = 3.40 × 10^4 N. The measurement and derivation of this value are described in the Appendix. Furthermore, assuming quasi-static motion, we ignore the viscosity coefficient. The ellipse axis does not coincide with the y and z axes but is tilted. The angle between the major axis of the ellipse and the y-axis is 8.6 deg. For a typical robot arm consisting of pitch and yaw joints in horizontal posture, the two axes of the endpoint compliance ellipsoid coincide with the rotation axes of pitch or yaw joints in horizontal posture. However, in coupled tendon drive, the ellipse tilts because joint angle changes affect joints with different rotation axes.

3.2. Endpoint compliance measurement experiment
We conducted an endpoint compliance measurement experiment in horizontal posture to verify the validity of the previous section. The experiment was conducted by stopping the base motors with Super Dragon maintained horizontally. The experiment was conducted by connecting a force gauge (Nidec-Shimpo: FGP-50) to the Super Dragon's tip with a rope, and measuring the tension when pulling and releasing in both positive and negative directions along the y-axis and z-axis. The tip position was measured by driving the force gauge at a constant speed using a linear stage (COMS: PM40B-25X) and reading the tension at regular time intervals, measuring the tip position twice in each of the four directions along the y and z axes. Here, since rope elongation occurs due to pulling the arm tip and the passage of time, increasing the joint angle error from the horizontal posture, we corrected the joint angles to horizontal posture after two experiments in each direction. The movement speed of the linear stage was 1 mm/s for the first measurement in the y-axis positive direction and 2 mm/s for all others.

The measurement results from the rise of tension to maximum tension were taken as the measurement results. Next, the measurement results were linearly approximated using the least squares method (polyfit function, Matlab). The data are displayed such that the line for pulling passes through the origin, and the line for releasing intersects at the position of maximum tension. The measurement results in the y-axis positive direction and y-axis negative direction are shown, with the first and second measurements shown from left to right for each direction. Similarly, the measurement results in the z-axis direction are shown. The average value of the measured slopes in each data set was taken as the tip stiffness. By taking the reciprocal, the compliance in the y and z-axis directions was calculated as 31.8 and 22.6 mm/N, respectively.

We compare the joint angle changes when pulled 0.2 m in the first measurements in the y-axis positive direction and z-axis positive direction with the analytical results. The analytical calculation method for joint angles uses the pseudo-inverse matrix of the Jacobian matrix derived as shown in Section 3.1 for Equation (5) to calculate the joint angle changes when giving 0.2 m displacement in the y and z-axis directions, respectively. The measured values and analytical results are shown.

We compare these results with the analytical results from the previous section. The intersection point on the horizontal axis (labeled y-axis compliance) of the endpoint compliance ellipsoid indicates the compliance when force is applied laterally to the arm tip. Similarly, the compliance in the z-axis direction can be obtained, with the compliance in the y-axis and z-axis directions being 315 and 234 mm/N, respectively. The blue bars represent the analytical values of endpoint compliance obtained in Section 3.1, and the red bars represent the measured values obtained from measurement experiments. In contrast, as shown in Section 3.3, the analytical values of endpoint compliance obtained using the equivalent tendon stiffness K_exp including frictional forces acting on the rope are shown in green. The measured values compared to the analytical solutions were 9.91% in the y-axis direction and 10.4% in the z-axis direction, showing lower compliance in the measured values but confirming that the order of magnitude matches.

3.3. Consideration
We discuss the results from the previous section. The measured endpoint compliance values are approximately 10% of the analytically obtained values. The cause of such numerical differences is considered to be the influence of frictional forces acting on the joint control tendons. In Section 3.1, the analysis was performed under the assumption that tension is uniformly distributed along the rope with respect to elongation. However, in reality, the rope tension is not uniformly distributed due to rotational friction at pulleys where the rope is wound around and frictional forces arising from contact with the rope itself at sections wound around pulleys. The non-uniform distribution of rope tension may have resulted in the measured values showing smaller compliance. Here, we consider calculating the equivalent stiffness of the joint control tendons using joint angular displacement data and tension data obtained from logs in the endpoint compliance measurement experiment presented in Section 3.2. If higher tension than expected was acting due to frictional forces, the obtained joint control tendon stiffness represents an equivalent stiffness that includes the influence of friction. Therefore, we calculate the equivalent stiffness of each joint control tendon obtained from compliance measurements and re-analytically determine the endpoint compliance based on this to investigate the influence of frictional forces acting on the rope on endpoint compliance.

Here, we calculate the equivalent stiffness of joint control tendons based on joint angle and tension data from the compliance measurement experiment in the positive z-axis direction. The reason for focusing on z-axis direction measurements is that most of Super Dragon's joints are pitch joints, and more joint control tendons are expected to influence the results compared to the y-axis direction, thus yielding more accurate results. Since all the actuators were completely stopped, elongation Δl occurs in each joint control tendon solely due to joint angular displacement caused by pulling the arm's endpoint. The elongation Δl can be expressed as Δl = Rj^T Δθ using joint angular displacement data Δθ and the pulley matrix Rj. Note that the elongation Δl here represents the elongation from the initial horizontal posture and differs from the elongation from the natural length of each joint control tendon. Linear interpolation was performed on the experimentally obtained elongation Δl [m] and tension f [N] data (polyfit function, Matlab) to obtain an equivalent stiffness matrix including the effects of friction, denoted as K_exp [N/m]. Here, multiplying the diagonal components of K_exp by the natural length of each rope yields the strain stiffness k_exp. However, it is difficult to measure all unloaded tendon lengths in advance for Super Dragon, where numerous tendons are wound around pulleys. Additionally, when the arm is maintained in a horizontal posture, joint control tendons experience tensions up to approximately 1000 N, but the resulting elongation from the unloaded state is considered sufficiently small compared to rope lengths on the order of several meters. Therefore, in this paper, we multiply the equivalent stiffness K_exp of the joint control tendons by the rope length of the joint control tendons in the horizontal posture, and treat the obtained approximate values as the strain stiffness k_exp.

Each component of the obtained k_exp is shown. Rope numbers follow the convention where the two ropes driving the n-th joint are designated as ropes 2n−1 and 2n. Graphs for pitch joint control tendons are shown in magenta, and those for yaw joint control tendons in cyan. The strain stiffness value k = 3.40 × 10^4 N used in the analysis in Section 3.1 is indicated by a black dashed line. As can be seen, joint control tendons closer to the base show values closer to k = 3.40 × 10^4 N, while those on the tip side, which are wound around more pulleys, tend to show larger values. Thus, it was newly found that frictional forces acting on the rope increase measured tension values and contribute to increased equivalent stiffness.

Using the obtained K_exp, we calculate the endpoint compliance using Equation (7), similar to Section 3.1. Additionally, let K_sim denote the tendon stiffness matrix calculated from the strain stiffness k = 3.40 × 10^4 N obtained from viscoelastic measurements used in Section 3.1. The resulting ellipsoids are shown. The ellipsoid obtained using K_sim is shown as a blue solid line, and that obtained using K_exp as a green solid line. The measured endpoint compliance values obtained in Section 3.2 are plotted as red points. Using K_exp yields a smaller compliance ellipsoid. The obtained endpoint compliance values in the y-axis and z-axis directions are shown in green. While the analytical values using K_sim differ from the measured values by approximately an order of magnitude, the analytical values based on K_exp remain within approximately three times the measured values. Regarding this approximately threefold difference, we believe it is due to factors that do not affect joint control tendon tension values, such as link deflection, minor play in mechanism assembly, and friction in bearings of joint mechanism components connecting links other than pulleys, as well as nonlinearity in tendon stiffness with respect to elongation. From the above, it was found that using equivalent tendon stiffness including the effects of frictional forces acting on the rope in endpoint compliance analysis enables obtaining analytical values closer to measured values.

From Table 1, the joint angle changes in the experiment where the arm tip was pulled in the y-axis positive direction show a maximum error of 0.3 deg compared to the analytical results, indicating good agreement. For the z-axis positive direction, the maximum error between measured values and analytical results was 1.0 deg. This is considered to be due to the influence of gravity, and although the error is larger compared to the y-axis direction, it mostly agrees with the analytical results. From the above, the analytical results are considered to be valid.

Thus, we have shown through analysis and experiments that the coupled tendon-driven articulated arm Super Dragon can achieve compliance without special control due to the elongation of joint control tendons. Simultaneously, we revealed that analytically calculated endpoint compliance, when the rope becomes long, exhibits errors despite matching the order of magnitude with measured values due to the influence of frictional forces acting on the rope.

4. Contact experiments with external environments
Utilizing the compliance shown in the previous section, we conducted motion experiments involving contact with obstacles. We conducted two experiments: one where the arm tip contacts an obstacle, and another where part of the arm's gravity is supported by the external environment. Additionally, assuming that investigation equipment is mounted, a 5 kg weight is attached to the tip of Super Dragon.

4.1. Contact experiment with horizontally positioned obstacles
We placed an obstacle on the right side as viewed from the base of the arm, and conducted a motion experiment where the arm tip contacts the obstacle and then separates. Here, the installed obstacle is a wooden rectangular parallelepiped, which has a structure sufficiently rigid relative to the force generated by the Super Dragon's endpoint. The data of joint angle measurements and joint torques calculated from tension measurements using Equation (2) during the experiment are shown. Note that the data for each joint angle are plotted with solid lines, while the target value for 6th joint is plotted with a dashed line. The arm tip contacted the obstacle at 134 s and separated from the obstacle at 153 s. During this motion, no hardware damage was observed to either the arm or the obstacle. The absolute values of joint torques for the yaw joints (6th, 8th, and 10th joints) increased during contact compared to before contact, due to the arm tip receiving external force in the y-axis direction. It is considered that contact between the arm and the external environment can be detected by the operator measuring these changes in joint torque. In this way, we achieved contact with the external environment without damage by utilizing the compliance of the coupled tendon-driven articulated arm, and demonstrated the possibility of detecting such contact.

4.2. Joint torque reduction through contact with the external environment
In this section, we attempted to reduce joint torque through contact between the arm and the external environment. In other words, rather than detecting and avoiding contact with the external environment, we actively exploit such contact. The required joint torque is determined by the arm's posture and tip payload, which in turn determines the target values for driving tendon tension. However, in practice, there are limits to the tendon strength, which constrains the joint torque that can be generated at each joint. Therefore, postures requiring high joint torque are difficult to maintain, and the workspace is limited. Here, the workspace is defined as the set of positions reachable by the end effector in three-dimensional space. Therefore, by utilizing contact with the external environment to reduce the joint torque required for posture maintenance, tendon tension can also be reduced, potentially resulting in expanding workspace. We conducted an experiment where the 9th joint (pitch) was brought into contact with an obstacle placed on the ground from above, and then the 10th joint (yaw) was driven to swing the tip left and right. Note that in this experiment, since it is sufficient to obtain a reaction force from the floor, we determined that the obstacle does not need to be rigid and used a cushioned air bed. The joint angle progression and joint torques during this time are shown. The joint torque calculation method is the same as in the previous section. Note that the data for each joint angle are plotted with solid lines, while the target value for 9th joint and 10th joint is plotted with a dashed line. The horizontal axis shows time, and the 9th joint and obstacle were in contact from 379 to 529 s. As shown in the lower part, the absolute values of joint torques were reduced during this interval. This is because the 9th joint receives an upward reaction force from contacting the obstacle, supporting part of the gravity. Additionally, we successfully drove the 10th joint by ±10 deg while in contact with the external environment from 403 to 496 s. Thus, we found that joints can be driven while reducing joint torque by utilizing external contact. This makes it possible to significantly expand the arm's workspace.

5. Conclusion
In this paper, we analytically demonstrated that the coupled tendon-driven articulated arm Super Dragon has compliance due to the elasticity of joint control tendons, and confirmed this using actual hardware. Furthermore, utilizing this compliance, we showed that the arm can safely contact the external environment, and demonstrated the possibility of detecting external contact through changes in torque values calculated from tension measurements. Moreover, we experimentally demonstrated that joint torque can be reduced by intentionally contacting the external environment rather than detecting and avoiding such contact. In this experiment, we successfully reduced the required joint torque magnitude of each joint by contacting the external environment and successfully operated the tip joint in that state.

As future work, we plan to derive a calculation method to identify the contact point position with the arm from changes in torque values during external contact, and conduct principle verification using actual hardware.