Honkai: Star Rail
A Space Fantasy RPG
Free - In-App Purchases

Honkai: Star Rail is a HoYoverse space fantasy RPG.
Hop aboard the Astral Express and experience the galaxy's infinite wonders filled with adventure and thrills.
Players will meet new companions across various worlds and maybe even run into some familiar faces. Overcome the
struggles together caused by Stellaron and unravel the hidden truths behind it! May this journey lead us starward!

a Explore Distinct Worlds - Discover the boundless universe filled with wonder
3, 2, 1, initiating warp! A space station with Curios sealed away, a foreign planet with an eternal winter, a starship hunting
down abominations, the Planet of Festivities nested in sweet dreams, The Eternal Land where destiny hangs by a thread, the
arcadia that had once fallen into a painting scroll ... Every stop of the Astral Express is a never-before-seen view of the
galaxy! Explore fantastical worlds and civilizations, uncover mysteries beyond imagination, and set out on a journey of
wonder!

Riveting RPG Experience - A best-in-class immersive adventure beyond the stars
Embark on a galactic adventure where you shape the story. Our cutting-edge engine renders high-quality cinematics in real-
time, our innovative facial expression system concocts genuine sentiments, and HOYO-MiX's original score sets the stage.
Join us now and journey through a universe of conflict and collaboration, where your choices define the outcome!

o Fateful Encounters Await! - Cross paths with characters intertwined by destiny
As you traverse the sea of stars, you'll not only have countless adventures, but also many chance encounters. You will forge
friendships in a frozen land, fight side by side with comrades in the Xianzhou crisis, and have unexpected encounters in a
golden dream. A game of an Aeon when the Phantasmoon waxes full ... On this alien world, you will meet greet companions
walking these different paths amongst the starts and experience incredible journeys together. Let your laughter and woes
compose the story of your present, past, and future.

Turn-based Combat Reimagined - Exhilarating multifaceted gameplay fueled by strategy and skill
Engage in a combat system that sports a variety of team compositions. Match your lineups based on your enemy's qualities
and strike while the iron is hot to bring down your foes and claim victory! Break Weaknesses! Deliver Follow-up Attacks! Deal
Damage over Time ... and try out the brand-new Aha Instant! Countless strategies and tactics await your unlocking. Build an
approach suited for you and face the onrush of successive challenges! Beyond the thrilling turn-based combat, there are
also simulation management modes, casual elimination mini-games, puzzle exploration, and more ... Explore an exciting
variety of gameplay and experience endless possibilities!

Top-Tier Voice Actors for an Immersive Experience - A dream team of multiple language dubs assembled for the entire
story
When words come alive, when stories give you a choice, when characters possess a soul ... We present to you dozens of
emotions, hundreds of facial expressions, thousands of lore pieces, and a million words that make up this universe's beating
heart. With full voice-over in four languages, the characters will transcend their virtual existences and become your tangible
companions, creating a new chapter in this tale together with you.

Customer Service Email: hsrcs_en@hoyoverse.com
Official Website: https://hsr.hoyoverse.com/en-us/home
Official Forum: https://www.hoyolab.com/accountCenter/postList?id=172534910
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/HonkaiStarRail
Instagram: https://instagram.com/honkaistarrail
Twitter: https://twitter.com/honkaistarrail
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/@honkaistarrail
Discord: https://discord.gg/honkaistarrail
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@honkaistarrail_official
Reddit: https://www.reddit.com/r/honkaistarrail

Editors' Choice

An unforgettable RPG with cinematic turn-based battles and a captivating
story.

Absolute cifera


5d ago
Absolute cifera


I LOVE this game I have been playing since last year's anniversary and let me tell you you
can get so many PREMIUM currency just by having a really good time and yes it is
stressful sometimes but that's only when you have to repeat something over and over
again but this rarely happens AND there are many characters that you WILL fall in love
with (talking about design wise but I'm not judging) and that is my conclusion

Literally best turn based game

11/04/2025

I've been playing this since it came out, and I'm proud of how far it's come since the
release. I am a sucker for turn based games, but I used to really be into genshin and I
remember before hsr came out I was really looking forward to it being released, I would
literally look for any information about when it would come out haha. But anyways, if you
like story games, turn based games or just curious in general I recommend playing, even
if it's just to try it out.
What's New >


3rd Anniversary Version "So Laughed the Masses" is now available!
"New Characters" "Silver Wolf LV.999 (Elation: Imaginary)", "Evanescia (Elation: Physical)"
"Anniversary Rewards" Check in cumulatively to claim Star Rail Special Pass x20, get an additional Star Rail Special Pass x10 from Anniversary Gifts, and log in to receive a "Golden
Companion Spirit," exchangeable for limited 5-star characters like "Huohuo" and "Robin"!
"New Story" Trailblaze Mission "Planarcadia - So Laughed the Masses"
"New Events" "Cosmic Data Roaming", "Cosmicon, Roll On Again!", etc.
"Gameplay Update" Currency Wars: Zero-Sum Game Season Expansion
"Other" New areas, new enemies, "Novaflare" Character Enhancements, and more

App Privacy >
The developer, COGNOSPHERE PTE. LTD., indicated that the app's privacy practices may include handling of data as described below. For more information, see the
developer's privacy policy.

Data Used to Track You

The following data may be used to track you across
apps and websites owned by other companies:
Identifiers

Data Linked to You

The following data may be collected and linked to
your identity:

Privacy practices may vary, for example, based on the features you use or your age. Learn More

Accessibility

The developer has not yet indicated which accessibility features this app supports. Learn More

Information

Seller
COGNOSPHERE PTE. LTD.

Compatibility
Requires iOS 13.0 or later. 

In-App Purchases
Yes 

Size

3.9 GB

Languages
English and 12 more 

Copyright
Copyright @ COGNOSPHERE. All Rights Reserved.

Category
Roleplaying

Age Rating
13+ 
