Spotify: Music and Podcasts
Songs & Playlists For You
Free

With the Spotify app, you can explore an extensive library of music and podcasts for free. Curate the best playlists and stream millions of free songs, albums, and original
podcasts on your phone or tablet. Subscribe to Spotify Premium to download and listen offline wherever you are, and unlock our catalog of audiobooks.

Why choose Spotify as your go-to music and podcast app? Here, you can:
. Listen to over 100 million songs and 6 million podcast titles
. Explore our selection of specially-crafted artist playlists
. Easily search for your favorite songs, albums, artists, and podcasts
. Discover personalized music recommendations tailored to your unique taste
. Subscribe to your favorite free podcasts so you never miss an episode, and even curate your own podcast library

Spotify Free is more than a music player - find the sounds you love and stream music and podcasts online, for free. Enjoy personalized playlists or curate and share your
own, discover the hottest new releases, explore upcoming events from your favorites, and more.

. Stream millions of free songs and podcasts
. Create playlists with your favorite music
Share songs and playlists with friends and family (feature restrictions may apply in some regions)
. Discover personalized playlists made just for you, and collaborate on playlists with your friends
. Enjoy your personal Discover Weekly playlist every week
. Stay in the know with the Release Radar and New Music Friday playlists
. Find nearby events and gigs by your favorite artists
See your most played songs, genres, artists, and more with yearly Spotify Wrapped
. Stream music across your devices with Spotify
. Use Spotify Connect and enjoy listening on smart speakers, desktop, laptop, smart TV, Chromecast, PlayStation®, Xbox®, smartwatch, in your car, and more - limited
number of device models apply

Spotify Premium - a great way to enjoy the benefits of an offline music player, and stream music without WiFi. By pressing download, you can access your songs, playlists,
podcasts, and audiobooks offline, wherever you are.
. Listen to music, podcasts, and audiobooks - all in one place
. Ad-free music listening: enjoy your music with no ad interruptions
. Enjoy full on-demand playback
. Audiobooks in Premium are currently available in the US, UK, Australia, Ireland, New Zealand, and Canada. Discover 250,000+ audiobook titles with 15 hours/month of
available listening for Premium Individual subscribers and Duo & Family plan managers.
. Superior sound quality on supported devices
. AI DJ: a personalized guide that knows your music taste so well it can choose what to play for you
. Enjoy on desktop, phone, tablet, computer, smartwatch, and in your car
. Listen and control the listening session together by hosting a Jam in real time with friends
. Download songs, podcasts, and audiobooks for offline listening, without an internet connection
. No contract required - cancel your subscription whenever you want

Spotify lets you play music wherever you are. Listen to your favorite songs and discover new music, podcasts, and audiobooks with the Spotify app!


Favorite app ever


I personally love this app. I have had it for over 4 years, and it's been an app I use daily. If
you are thinking about getting it, for sure get the Premium plan, no ads, endless skipping
of songs, shuffle play, and a good amount of more things. One thing I will say is
frustrating is the constant change of the like button to songs, they removed the heart for
whatever reason and with that they made adding a song to a playlist but not your liked
songs a lot harder, with a drop down feature you have to scroll down to find the playlist
you want. I will say that I love that you can get to choose if you want your playlists public
or not because let's be honest some playlists do not need to see the light of day but can
still be enjoyed in peace. I also like what they did with the front page, being able to just
swipe right to click onto our profile and access our settings much easier. My most
favorite feature that might not be new but I did just discover, is on that same page where
we access the settings and our profile there is this "Recents" tab where you can go and
see all of the songs you've listened to and the amount of times I've used it to find a song
I liked in someone else's playlist, or a podcast episode I was listening to but didn't save,
my lord I love that feature so much. But overall it's a really good app and something that
if you get it, it will be used in your daily life if you are a fanatic music listener.



I love the app but not so much the new update. Please give us a retro date. Also the
option to go to your liked songs library and not all your playlist with out liked songs as a
playlist. To add whenever I like a album the songs do not save, I have to like each song
individually for it to save to my library, or "liked songs playlist". Whenever I click on the
artist it only shows me the artist I follow and then artist suggestions based on music I
like. Please just go back to when we click on artist it shows us all artist that we have
saved in our library. Or simply JUST A RETRO-DATE FROM AROUND LIKE 2016 please.
And the hearts next to the liked songs make no sense when we already know that they
are liked songs. You can easily click on it by accident and not remember what song you
deleted. The queue should show what songs you recently listened to. Not saying it
should show every last song you listened to but at leas like the last 20, just a suggestion
to make the app better. Lastly theres only alphabetical quick scroll on our liked songs
"playlist", which should just be a music library as stated before. We need alphabetical
quick scroll in all playlist, or at least the ones we decide to put in alphabetical order. Also
you should add back the "skip song" when adding an album to a playlist with a song from
the album already in it. We only have the option of canceling adding the album to the
playlist or just hit add anyway. When will people behind apps realize theres never a need
for a unnecessary update.



Stop changing the way the queue works every single time I use this app! I swear Im this
close to subscribing to apple music . Just let me keep the option to play my liked
songs randomly or not. Also why did I suddenly lose the option to play my liked songs
based on genre ?! You guys are killing me with the constant changes. Heres what the
people want! To be able to play my liked songs randomly or in or order !!! I like the option
sometimes! I also still want to be able to sort my liked songs by genre. Why did that
suddenly go away !? I used to like the way you could channel what you want based your
mood 'like "happy"' and whatnot but whatever, I could deal with the changes you made
for whatever reason. Can you please stop changing the way liked songs work every
single time I use this app !!!! Its so frustrating when I cant play my liked songs randomly
all of a sudden and now I cant play my liked based on genre. FOR WHAT REASON !!!!!
Stop making stupid changes all the time! You're pushing your people to apple music, I
swear. I have subscriptions to you both but I still dont want to start using them over you,
but I will. All I ask for is some consistency !! I want to be able to play my liked songs by
genre, and I want to be able to consistently play my liked songs randomly or in order. I
dont know why you change these all the time but you are really pushing to start using
apple music or even soundcloud. Keep the consistent good features, and stop changing
for the worse all the time!

Data Linked to You


What's New>

We're always making changes and improvements to Spotify. To make sure you don't miss a thing, just keep your Updates turned on.

App Privacy

The developer, Spotify, indicated that the app's privacy practices may include handling of data as described below. For more information, see the developer's privacy
policy.

Data Used to Track You
The following data may be used to track you across
apps and websites owned by other companies:

Contact Info

Usage Data

Identifiers

Data Linked to You

The following data may be collected and linked to
your identity:

Health & Fitness

Financial Info

Contact Info

User Content

Identifiers

Diagnostics

Purchases

Location

e Contacts

Search History

Usage Data

Other Data

Privacy practices may vary, for example, based on the features you use or your age. Learn More

Accessibility

The developer has not yet indicated which accessibility features this app supports. Learn More

Information

Seller
Spotify

Compatibility
Requires iOS 16.1 or later. 

Copyright
2008-2026 Spotify Ltd.

Size
262.5 MB

Languages
English and 62 more 

Category
Music

Age Rating
13+ 