Clash Royale
PvP Battle in Card Tower Duel

Free • In-App Purchases

Enter the Arena! Build your Battle Deck and outsmart the enemy in fast real-time battles. From the creators of CLASH OF CLANS comes a real-time multiplayer battle game
starring your favourite Clash characters and more. Start battling against players from around the world!

BECOME A MASTER OF STRATEGY AND DECK BUILDING
Choose unique Cards to your Battle Deck and head to the Arena for Battle!
Place your Cards right and knock down the enemy King and Princesses from their Towers in a strategic and fast-paced match.

COLLECT AND UPGRADE 100+ CARDS
Hog Rider! Collect and upgrade 100+ Cards featuring the Clash of Clans troops, spells and defences you know and love and many others. Win battles and progress to new
Arenas to unlock powerful new Cards to your collection!

BATTLE YOUR WAY TO THE TOP
Battle your way to the League and Global Tournaments to match against the best players in the world.
Compete for glory and rewards!

SEASONAL EVENTS
Unlock new Seasonal items like Tower Skins, Emotes and powerful Magic Items with the Season Pass and participate in fun Challenges that put your skills to the test!

JOIN A CLAN AND GO TO WAR
Join or form a Clan with other players to share Cards and battle in Clan Wars for BIG rewards!

See you in the Arena!

PLEASE NOTE! Clash Royale is free to download and play, however, some game items can also be purchased for real money. If you don't want to use this feature, please
disable in-app purchases in your device's settings. The game also includes random rewards.

X Notice of Access Permission:

[Optional permission]

Clash Royale may request permission via in game pop-ups to access your camera and send you notifications.

Camera: For in-game scanning of QR codes
Notifications: For sending notifications related to the game
Consent is optional and you can use the app and play the game regardless of whether or not you consent. You may refuse to give consent within the game. However,
certain app features may not work properly if you refuse optional access permissions"A network connection is also required.

Support
Are you having problems? Visit https://help.supercellsupport.com/clash-royale/en/ or contact us in game by going to Settings > Help and Support.

Privacy Policy:
http://supercell.com/en/privacy-policy/

Terms of Service:
http://supercell.com/en/terms-of-service/

Parent's Guide:
http://supercell.com/en/parents/

Editors' Choice

Colourful chaos awaits in our 2016 iPhone Game of the Year. Supercell's awesome card
battler delivers excellent deck-building mechanics and fast-paced fights in a package
that's easy to understand and undeniably fun. Upgrading, unlocking and experimenting
with cards gives the game endless replayability, and deciding just where to drop your
heroes makes each battle distinct. But no matter how good your deck is, there's no
substitute for skill and quick thinking.

I'm just trying my luck with this and it doesn't look
too great for.

11/24/2025
Djj29

The first time I heard about it I was so excited for this one because the second episode is
the best episode in a series and the third one I have to wait till next week for a while and
it's been like that all year I just don't get excited because the third season has a whole
bunch and the first season was the last season was the third season was so long I just
want you guys in a better way I love the new episode but it's just not good I don't think I
have to do this for the second episode and it's a good thing that we all get a lot done I
just think it will make a great story but I'm really happy about this show because it just
happened so I just wanted it just feels so exciting I hope you're all set up to make a little
something else that we have been saying goodbye I just don't think I don't want it I love
the second season was just in my heart goes into a it's not a good thing about the last
season I don't want that is it is it is it just doesn't matter if I just wanted it doesn't make it
just don't be sorry if I don't want anything to me is what you know that means so yeah it's
not that you don't have any sense and I'm not mad I love the show and I'm not like you
don't want anything I love it but I'm like I'm like I'm just trying and you just like I'm like
yeah it's like I'm not really that kind and you just kind and I'm just saying like you just like
I'm like oh you just like you just know how much.


War is still broken

01/15/2021

I have a love/hate relationship with this game but it is still my single favorite mobile game.
However, the matchmaking in War is beyond broken. Probably half the time, I am playing
decks with an average level 2-3 higher than mine. I'm not sure that I have ever written a
game review but I am hoping Supercell's developers hear enough reviews like this to
actually make a change. It is all but impossible to overcome a deck with all level 13 when
you have a mix of 10 and 11. It's gotten to the point that I usually just quit as soon as it
becomes obvious that the person I am playing against isn't terrible because I just have
nearly 0% chance to win otherwise. Not only do they have better cards typically, I will go
and check the player profile afterwards and they often have many more trophies than I
do. You know a matchmaking system is broken when you are consistently outgunned and
compete against players with higher achievements/skill in the game. I really can't make
sense of the matchmaking algorithm. I am sure they put a ton of work into it but it is
about as bad as it gets. This is only in reference to war. Single player matchmaking is
actually pretty good. As background, I actually play 6 accounts ranging from 4300
trophies on my lowest to a high of 5800 on my best account. The only reason I even
play war is to get points for my clan and because I don't want to let them down. I HATE
having to play war and definitely wouldn't if I wasn't in a clan. Supercell, PLEASE FIX.



What's New >

Various minor bug fixes and improvements

App Privacy /

The developer, Supercell, indicated that the app's privacy practices may include handling of data as described below. For more information, see the developer's privacy
policy.

Data Used to Track You

The following data may be used to track you across
apps and websites owned by other companies:

Usage Data

Data Linked to You
The following data may be collected and linked to
your identity:

Purchases

Contact Info

User Content

Usage Data

Other Data

Location

Contacts

Identifiers

Diagnostics

Privacy practices may vary, for example, based on the features. Learn More

Accessibility

The developer has not yet indicated which accessibility features this app supports. Learn More

Information

Seller
Supercell Oy

Compatibility
Requires iOS 14.0 or later. 

In-App Purchases
Yes 

Size
1.3 GB

Languages
English and 20 more

Copyright
2016-2026 Supercell Oy

Category
Strategy

Age Rating
9+ 
