YouTube
Videos, Music and Live Streams
Free . In-App Purchases

Get the official YouTube app on iPhones and iPads. See what the world is watching -- from the hottest music videos to what's popular in gaming, fashion, beauty, news,
learning and more. Subscribe to channels you love, create content of your own, share with friends, and watch on any device.

Watch and subscribe
. Browse personal recommendations on Home
. See the latest from your favorite channels in Subscriptions
. Look up videos you've watched, liked, and saved for later in Library

Explore different topics, what's popular, and on the rise (available in select countries)
. Stay up to date on what's popular in music, gaming, beauty, news, learning and more
. See what's trending on YouTube and around the world on Explore
. Learn about the coolest Creators, Gamers, and Artists on the Rise (available in select countries)

Connect with the YouTube community
. Keep up with your favorites creators with Posts, Stories, Premieres, and Live streams
. Join the conversation with comments and interact with creators and other community members

Create content from your mobile device
. Create or upload your own videos directly in the app
. Engage with your audience in real time with live streaming right from the app

Find the experience that fits you and your family (available in select countries)
. Every family has their own approach to online video. Learn about your options: the YouTube Kids app or a new parent supervised experience on YouTube at
youtube.com/myfamily

Support creators you love with channel memberships (available in select countries)
. Join channels that offer paid monthly memberships and support their work
. Get access to exclusive perks from the channel & become part of their members community
. Stand out in comments and live chats with a loyalty badge next to your username

Upgrade to YouTube Premium (available in select countries)
. Watch videos uninterrupted by ads, while using other apps, or when the screen is locked
. Save videos for when you really need them - like when you're on a plane or commuting
. Get access to YouTube Music Premium as part of your benefits

Note: If you subscribe via Apple, payment will be charged to App Store Account at confirmation of purchase. Subscription automatically renews unless auto-renew is turned
off at least 24 hours before the end of the current period. Account will be charged for renewal within 24 hours prior to the end of the current period at the rate of the
selected plan. Subscriptions and auto-renewal may be managed by going to Account Settings after purchase.

YouTube paid service terms: https://www.youtube.com/t/terms_paidservice.

Add latest from and update the app and fix the bug and add search in video
with captions and sponsored ad needs to be showed in the bottom and
remove you must sign in to view this video and videos skipped, videos aren't
playing and needs to be fixed with the bug and it needs to be normal and
internet of videos isn't working and fix all of it immediately!

When I'm watching a video and I come out of the app and resume or rewind to a certain
timestamp the audio will resume and play but the visual rests at a blurry freeze frame.
This doesn't happen all the time but when it does the only thing that fixes it is to go to
history refresh, select the video and rewind to where I left off. This doesn't happen all the
time but when it does it's extremely off putting

Starting with a search that didn't look to promising as the prompt was broad. The search
engine was quick and succinct in its found results. The first result was exactly the item
that I was looking for. I was able to glean the source that there were additional videos
from that producer, that was a plus. The various videos that followed were relevant to the
search and added greater perspectives.


What's New

Bug fixes, performance improvements, and more cat videos.

App Privacy >

The developer, Google, indicated that the app's privacy practices may include handling of data as described below. For more information, see the developer's privacy
policy.

Data Used to Track You
The following data may be used to track you across
apps and websites owned by other companies:

Contact Info

Identifiers

Data Linked to You

The following data may be collected and linked to
your identity:

Purchases

Location

Contacts

Search History

Identifiers

Diagnostics

Financial Info

Contact Info

User Content

Browsing History

Usage Data

Other Data

Privacy practices may vary, for example, based on the features you use or your age. Learn More

Accessibility

The developer has not yet indicated which accessibility features this app supports. Learn More

Information

Seller

Google LLC

Compatibility
Requires iOS 16.0 or later. 

In-App Purchases
Yes 

Size
352 MB

Languages
English and 72 more 

Copyright
2026 Google LLC

Category
Photo & Video

Age Rating
13+ 


