When methods matter: how implementation choices shape topic discovery in financial text
Abstract
This paper examines the application of LDA topic modelling to risk disclosures in FTSE350 firms’ annual reports. We show that LDA implementation choices significantly impact topic representations and subsequent inferences. Using a corpus of FTSE350 annual reports, we show that preprocessing decisions, multiword expressions and labelling strategies materially affect topic interpretability and granularity. Our analysis reveals that while risk reporting addresses key business risks at an aggregate level, the degree of firm-specific commentary is sensitive to topic granularity. Hierarchical linear modelling suggests that 27% of topic variation is within firms for broad topics, increasing to 75% for granular topics. We leverage GPT to enhance topic labelling, showcasing the potential of LLMs in financial text analysis. We also compare LDA to modern embedding-based topic models, finding that while they often generate more coherent topics, they introduce a new set of critical implementation choices and do not eliminate the need for researcher discretion. These findings challenge the claims of LDA objectivity and highlight the importance of domain expertise. We propose a practical checklist for LDA implementation in accounting and finance research emphasising transparency and robustness checks.

Keywords: textual analysis, topic modelling, risk disclosure, annual reports, Latent Dirichlet Allocation, GPT
JEL Classification: C55, M41, G14

1. Introduction
As the volume of narrative disclosure in financial markets grows exponentially, researchers face a critical challenge: how to reliably extract meaningful themes from vast corpora of text by combining methodological rigour with domain expertise. Unsupervised topic modelling using Latent Dirichlet Allocation (Blei et al. Citation2003) is gaining significant traction in the accounting and finance literature as researchers seek to understand and exploit the huge volumes of narrative disclosure. Over the last decade, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) has been applied to a variety of financial corpora including 10-K annual reports (Ball et al. Citation2015, Dyer et al., Citation2017), analysts’ reports (Huang et al. Citation2018), tax disclosures (Bozanic et al. Citation2018), conference calls (Donovon et al. Citation2021), and financial news (Bybee et al. Citation2024). However, despite LDA’s growing popularity, a fundamental tension remains; while it aims to reduce subjectivity in theme identification, implementation choices can nevertheless affect inferences. Although researcher discretion and its effects have been studied in the computational linguistics field, LDA applications in accounting are often portrayed as an objective, replicable process. Using risk disclosures from FTSE350 firms, we show how basic LDA methodological choices produce systematically different conclusions about disclosure quality and informativeness.

We focus on a rich corpus of risk disclosures published between 2018 and 2022 and shaped by UK regulations including the Companies Act 2006, Guidance on the Strategic Report (2018), the UK Corporate Governance Code (2018), and guidance from the Financial Reporting Council (Citation2014, Citation2021). The setting supports our research objective in two ways. First, guidance and analysis published by the Financial Reporting Council (FRC) (FRC Citation2018a, Citation2018b, Citation2022) and the FRC Lab (Citation2021) provide a comprehensive and objective benchmark for evaluating LDA outputs and variation therein caused by research design choices. Second, despite FRC and FRC Lab guidance, management retain substantial discretion in determining which risks are material and how to report on them. The resulting variation in topic coverage serves to foreground the effect of LDA implementation choices on findings and conclusions. While our primary goal lies in demonstrating the impact of researcher discretion in LDA applications, our topic analysis also provides insights on risk reporting among FTSE350 firms that speak to FRC concerns about boilerplating and limited coverage of key risks in areas such as human rights and cybersecurity threats.

We scratch beneath the veneer of LDA algorithmic objectivity to highlight how implementation choices can enhance the method's effectiveness for extracting meaningful insights. Specifically, we review five considerations in LDA model implementation and discuss the choices facing researchers in each case. We consider: (1) text preprocessing, (2) hyperparameter tuning, including optimising the number of LDA topics, (3) evaluating LDA model performance, (4) moving beyond the bag-of-words (BoW) model on which LDA is based, and (5) topic labelling. Despite widespread adoption of topic modelling in finance and accounting research, the field lacks a comprehensive understanding of how these choices impact discovery and interpretation of latent themes in corporate disclosures even though the tripwires are clearly articulated in the computational linguistics literature. For each consideration, we outline the issue(s) that researchers need to consider and the options available, and we illustrate applications and their impact using our corpus of risk disclosures. We draw on these discussions to build a checklist to which accounting researchers can refer when implementing and describing their LDA model to ensure their work is robust, transparent, and replicable. We do not recommend a specific ‘solution’ in most cases because no universally best option typically exists. Instead, the final choice is contingent on the research setting and therefore rests with the researcher to justify transparently. We also seek to promote informed and transparent application of LDA models in accounting research by providing a comprehensive set of resources in the form of further technical discussion, examples, and (python) script snippets in an accompanying Appendix.

We conduct five experiments to illustrate how choices in modelling LDA topics, whether implicit or explicit, impact findings and conclusions about the content of annual report risk narratives. Results reveal how text preprocessing choices, careful treatment of important multiword expressions (phrases), and use of part-of-speech (POS) tagging to leverage the basic rules of grammar can overcome some of the more egregious limitations of LDA’s BoW assumption. We also show how different approaches to selecting LDA hyperparameters including the optimal number of topics (K) impacts topic representation, and how methods such as visualisation can help to fine-tune model hyperparameters and reveal topics that are more interpretable. Critically, we demonstrate that a mechanical approach of setting K equal to the maximum coherence score (or any of the alternative evaluation metrics that are available) is unlikely to generate the most interpretable set of topics. Finally, we demonstrate the critical role of labelling strategy for interpreting results and informing subsequent analyses. Holding the number of topics constant, we show how labels (and therefore insights) vary between a single labeller, multiple labellers working as team, and generative AI labelling using GPT. In the latter case, we show how more refined prompting strategies can generate more descriptive labels.

We use insights from our experiments utilising FTSE350 firms’ annual report risk disclosures to illustrate the consequences of these LDA methodological choices. Our analysis reveals how seemingly minor implementation decisions can lead to fundamentally different conclusions about the properties of corporate disclosure. For instance, conclusions about whether risk reports contain generic ‘boilerplate’ commentary or firm-specific analysis depend on the level of topic granularity set by the researcher. We show that a broad, 35-topic model, which scores highly on standard evaluation metrics, leads to the conclusion that risk disclosures are largely stale and generic. Conversely, using a more granular 100-topic model suggests that firms provide distinctive tailored commentary. The evidence supports the view that the ‘correct’ conclusion is not an objective output of the LDA algorithm but is instead contingent on researcher choice during the modelling process. The very definition of what constitutes boilerplating versus discussion of a meaningful risk is not a pre-existing fact to be discovered, but a conclusion shaped by the decisions made during the analytical process.

While our primary analyses focus on LDA, we also acknowledge recent advances in transformer architectures that support semantic text embeddings and therefore help to relax the BoW assumption. We repeat a subset of our analyses using topic models that leverage two embedding-based approaches: BERTopic (Grootendorst Citation2022) based on Google’s BERT language model (Devlin et al., Citation2019) and Alibaba Group’s GTE lightweight model built on BERT (Li et al. Citation2025). Results yield two important insights. First, embedding-based pipelines often (but not always) generate more coherent and interpretable topic representations, meaning that accounting researchers should not view LDA as their default topic modelling method. Second, adopting this new generation of embedding-based methods still requires researchers to make active, informed, and transparent implementation choices.

A key takeaway from our experiments is that accounting researchers must not shy away from acknowledging and embracing discretion when applying topic modelling. At a minimum, recognising and justifying available choices is essential for delivering rigorous analysis that yields reliable and replicable inferences. Additionally, discretion provides the opportunity for accounting and finance researchers to leverage their specialist knowledge and elevate the work from a purely statistical exercise that any data scientist could perform, to a rich, context-informed analysis where the incremental value of domain expertise is clear.

Our conclusions parallel recent methodological insights in other areas of accounting and finance research. Breuer and DeHaan (Citation2024) demonstrate that while fixed effects regression is powerful for eliminating unwanted variation, its use requires careful justification, as it can transform samples and variables in unintended ways. In addition, Menkveld et al. (Citation2024) document substantial ‘nonstandard errors’ arising from researcher discretion in implementing statistical tests. In both cases, the insights are new to many accounting researchers despite being common knowledge among econometricians. In a similar vein, we show that topic modelling implementation requires careful consideration of methodological choices that despite being well known to computational linguists are not fully appreciated by accounting researchers. Many critical topic modelling implementation choices often go undocumented in accounting research, creating hidden variation in how the same textual data can be analysed. We contribute to research on corporate disclosure by illustrating the need to acknowledge, document and carefully justify choices when applying topic modelling.

Our study also makes two practical contributions to the rapidly expanding literature in accounting and finance that uses NLP methods to extract information from textual disclosures. Our first practical contribution takes the form of an accessible guide to the pitfalls and opportunities of applying topic modelling. We use this guide to develop a simple checklist of implementation considerations for authors, reviewers, and research consumers to follow when constructing and interpreting topics. The checklist serves to highlight the choices that researchers must address and, critically, the opportunities for applying their domain expertise to enhance the richness of results and insights. Our second practical contribution is a suite of resources designed to lower the costs and increase the robustness of topic modelling for the typical accounting and finance researcher who has limited formal NLP training. Reducing costs in the form of barriers to entry and time is important because it allows accounting and finance researchers to invest proportionately more energy leveraging their comparative advantage in the form of domain expertise.

2. Background, literature review and research questions
2.1 Critique of topic modelling in accounting and finance research
LDA topic modelling provides researchers with a powerful means of organising, summarising and understanding very large archives of documents such as annual reports, analyst reports, earnings press releases, and prospectuses. The method is a form of unsupervised categorisation that relies on a statistical algorithm to ‘discover’ hidden groupings of tokens in the document collection. Having identified a fixed number of clusters (or topics) in the entire corpus, researchers are then able to represent documents by a distribution of discovered themes. For example, Document 1 may contain 10% Topic Y and 90% Topic Z, while Document 2 comprises 40% Topic Y and 60% Topic Z. The unsupervised approach is appealing because there is no need to train the model beforehand or even pre-specify what topics to look for in the data. The algorithmic nature of the method also leads many empiricists to conclude that the results are more objective and replicable than manual approaches to scoring text. For example, Huang et al. (Citation2018, p. 2835) state that ‘LDA offers several advantages over manual coding … [it] provides a reliable and replicable classification of topics’; Dyer et al. (Citation2017, p. 223) claim the method provides ‘… an approach for evaluating topical coverage for large samples of lengthy documents on a consistent and objective basis over time.’; and Ball et al. (Citation2015, p. 4) argue that ‘… LDA generates a rich audit trail of topic vocabularies that can be compared across firms. These vocabularies are computer generated and are not susceptible to researcher prejudice or data mining.’

While there is little doubt that LDA represents a valuable text mining tool for accounting and finance researchers, claims regarding its objectivity and ability to produce meaningful insight deserve closer scrutiny. Many limitations of LDA are well documented in the NLP literature (e.g. Mu et al. Citation2024b, Schofield and Mimno Citation2016):

(1). Although LDA models rely exclusively on a statistical clustering algorithm, results are highly conditional on a suite of parameters that the researcher must select. These include the optimal number of topics (K), the Dirichlet prior for document-topic distribution, the Dirichlet prior for topic-word distribution, and the learning method used for inference. While applications in accounting typically discuss the approach to selecting K, other parameter choices are rarely mentioned. This lack of transparency impedes replicability.

(2). A variety of metrics are available to inform the choice of optimal parameters, with different evaluation metrics producing different outcomes. Further, none of the evaluation metrics guarantee that topics in the ‘best’ model are optimal from an interpretability perspective. Careful tuning is required to generate interpretable topic representations and this tuning process requires researchers to exercise discretion.

(3). Even with full transparency over parameter choices, replicability is questionable because the LDA algorithm is stochastic and so models generated with the same parameters over the same data will produce different results.

(4). LDA is a BoW method and consequently there is no guarantee that the topics it generates will be semantically meaningful. Topics are merely probabilistic relations between tokens; the LDA algorithm does not discover meaning.

(5). The task of attributing meaning to LDA topic representations requires the researcher to assign labels to topics and this process is unavoidably subjective.

Accordingly, LDA topics are not necessarily replicable, semantically meaningful, and free from researcher bias. Similar to a manual coding approach, researchers must apply significant amounts of judgement. Contrary to studies applying manual coding procedures (e.g. Beattie et al. Citation2004, Comyns and Figge Citation2015), however, the judgements that researchers make when applying LDA are often hidden. Moreover, the view that researcher judgement is something to avoid when modelling topics in financial text overlooks the value of domain expertise. Expert knowledge of the research phenomenon is the main competitive advantage for accounting and finance researchers over a pure data science approach that treats the setting as a black box. Our view is that the application of theoretically informed and logically consistent judgement is something we should be promoting as a discipline, not restricting. We aim to shed light on key areas of judgement in LDA modelling, the impact these choices can have on results, and how careful application of judgement can lead to more informative insights. The context in which we explore these issues is risk reporting.

2.2 Empirical setting: UK risk reporting
To illustrate the impact of methodological choices, we use the setting of risk disclosures in UK annual reports. This context is ideal for three reasons. First, the regulatory environment, guided by the UK Corporate Governance Code and the FRC, mandates detailed discussion of risks, creating a rich corpus for analysis. Second, despite this regulation, a persistent debate exists regarding disclosure quality, with regulators and researchers frequently citing concerns about generic, ‘boilerplate’ narratives that lack firm-specific insight (FRC Citation2022, Abraham and Shrives Citation2014). This tension makes it a suitable setting to test how different analytical choices can lead to different conclusions about disclosure quality. Third, guidance from the FRC provides an objective, external benchmark for evaluating the topics our models discover, which we leverage in our analysis.

We extract principal risks and uncertainties (hereinafter risk) commentary from PDF annual reports with fiscal year-ends in 2018–2022 published by FTSE350 firms. We tag a firm as a FTSE350 constituent if it is an index constituent for at least one quarter at any point during our sample window. We include all reports from tagged firms during the sample period, regardless of whether they are a FTSE350 constituent in a particular calendar year. Our FTSE350 sample comprises a maximum of 2,268 reports. We use the tool from El Haj et al. (Citation2020) to extract annual report text and classify sections using headers in the report table of contents. We classify principal risks and uncertainties sections of the report as those whose header contains the text string ‘risk’ and ‘uncertain’. For reports that contain multiple principal risks-related sections, we aggregate text from the relevant sections. Our risk corpus consists of 1,992 reports from 478 unique firms after removing cases where we are unable to detect risk commentary automatically. The risk corpus contains 7.1 million tokens after removing punctuation, stop words, and single-letter words.

3. Areas of judgement in LDA topic modelling
Just how objective, replicable, and reliable is LDA topic modelling in terms of generating semantically meaningful insights? This section reviews implementation decisions where significant researcher judgement is unavoidable. The implementation decisions on which we focus are text preprocessing; ways to relax the BoW constraint; hyperparameter tuning; evaluating model performance and topic interpretability; and topic labelling. Further detail regarding each aspect is available in the appendix.

3.1. Text preprocessing
Careful preparation of the document corpus is a key step for LDA topic modelling. The properties of the input corpus can have a dramatic effect on topic interpretability and processing time. We distinguish between two levels of preprocessing. The first level, which we view as nondiscretionary involves basic clearing tasks such as lowercasing, removing HTML tags, non-ascii characters, symbols and elements of punctuation, ensuring consistency in spelling, abbreviations and hyphenation, and removing core stop words (i.e. unigrams that carry little or no useful information). While these steps are nondiscretionary, a degree of judgement nevertheless rests with the researcher for tasks such as choosing the stop word list. The second level of preprocessing involves considerably more researcher discretion, both in terms of what to do and how to do it. Examples in this group include:

Choice of tokenizer for breaking a stream of textual data into words, terms, sentences, symbols, or some other meaningful elements. Different tokenizers provide different functionality, which in turn can impact LDA outcomes.

Lemmatising and stemming to convert inflected words to a common base root. Stemmers eliminate affixes from words (e.g. runs, runner, running are mapped to run). Lemmatizers reduce derivationally related forms of word to a single dictionary base form (e.g. democracy, democratic, democratisation are mapped to their root form). These processes help to reduce dimensionality and improve clustering accuracy. However, outputs vary depending on the choice of stemming and lemmatising algorithm.

Removing context-specific stop words to further reduce dimensionality.

Removing very frequent and very rare words. High frequency words provide little or no discriminatory power across topics and can bias scoring functions. Rare words are candidates for removal because their association with other words is typically dominated by noise. Various statistics are available for identifying high and low frequency words but there is no accepted norm for setting cut-off levels.

The optimal combination of preprocessing steps is contingent on the text domain, the source and size of the input text, and the research purpose; simply following the steps in previous work may not be appropriate for a different dataset and research question. Careful judgement is therefore necessary to ensure internal and external consistency, while full transparency regarding steps in the processing pipeline is critical to ensure replicability.

3.2. Multiword expressions
Most LDA applications work with unigrams by default and therefore treat common multiword expressions (MWEs) such as ‘earnings per share’ as separate tokens rather than a single term. Meanwhile, the BoW assumption ignores context and meaning. For example, ‘bank’ is more likely to load on a financial services topic when it appears before ‘borrowing’, but on a trading performance topic when it appears before ‘holiday’. Researchers face the choice to operate exclusively at the unigram level or instead to capture semantically meaningful MWEs, with the final decision having a potentially significant impact on LDA results and topic interpretability.

3.3. Hyperparameters
The LDA algorithm requires researchers to define a number of parameters including:

The optimal number of topics (K).

The Dirichlet prior for the document-topic distribution (α).

The Dirichlet prior for the topic-word distribution (β).

The inference algorithm or learning method (e.g. Gibbs sampling with the mallet algorithm or variational inference with the gensim (Hoffman et al. Citation2010) algorithm).

Since default values for α and β apply for each learning method, and choice of LDA package (e.g. scikit-learn and genism in python or mallet with python wrapper) fixes the learning method, researchers can easily make (implicit) choices without appreciating the effects. Relying on default settings does not provide a sound basis for implementation.

3.4. Evaluation
Selecting the ‘best’ LDA model from a grid of hyperparameter combinations involves choosing an evaluation metric. Popular measures for selecting the optimal combination of hyperparameters include perplexity, coherence, diversity, and granularity (e.g. Chang et al. Citation2009, Röder et al. Citation2015). Some measures such as coherence and diversity favour models with fewer topics whereas granularity tends to favour richer topic representation. There is no magic formula for determining the best evaluation metric to adopt.

Topic modelling is an inherently interpretive task. A purely metric-based approach to hyperparameter optimisation cannot therefore guarantee that the topic representation with the highest score will yield the cleanest (most interpretable) set of topics. Interpretation is one of the steps in the LDA pipeline where accounting and finance researchers enjoy a substantial competitive advantage over data scientists. Exercising this judgement is therefore a process to be encouraged, not downplayed or avoided entirely. Best practice encourages manual intervention when selecting the preferred topic representation to maximise interpretability (Chang et al. Citation2009). Several options for manual input are available including Word Intrusion Tests (WIT) (Dyer et al. Citation2017) and graphical representation of the topic space based on topic distance scores. Finally, researchers can pre-determine a set of topics based on their domain expertise and then examine the extent to which the trained model covers these topics. These interpretative methods are complements rather than substitutes. Using multiple methods provides accounting and finance researchers with the opportunity to leverage their domain expertise to elevate the analysis beyond a pure text mining exercise. We add more detail on evaluation in section 1.2.4 in the appendix.

3.5. Labelling
The final step in the LDA topic model pipeline involves labelling topics. Although some black-box tests rely on unlabelled topics as inputs, most empirical analyses aim to discover meaning at some level and therefore labelling is a central part of the modelling process. Labelling is a wholly interpretative task that is entirely separate from the LDA algorithm and not amenable to quantification. Researcher discretion is therefore unavoidable regardless of the particular labelling strategy applied. Indeed, labelling is another step in the LDA pipeline where domain expertise, when applied rigorously, provides a comparative advantage for accounting and finance researchers.

Several observations emerge from this review. First, the text preprocessing pipelines vary considerably across studies, both in terms of transparency and specific steps. Some studies incorporate advanced features such as MWEs and lemmatisation (e.g. Fedyk Citation2024, Bybee et al. Citation2024), while others apply very basic steps such as stop word removal. The treatment of rare and frequent tokens is inconsistently reported. Further, where processing steps are discussed, the level of detail is typically not sufficient to support precise replication. Second, many studies do not report specific α and β values, suggesting possible use of default parameters. Where parameter values are disclosed, they are typically fixed; we found no mention of hyperparameter tuning using a grid search. Third, a variety of evaluation metrics are used including perplexity, coherence, and qualitative assessments. Very few studies report visualisations of the latent topic space as part of the model tuning process, and no studies of which we are aware work with multiple topic representations despite plausible alternatives almost certainly existing. Fourth, strategies for topic labelling, where relevant, attract little rigorous discussion or critical analysis. Finally, the opportunity for limiting researcher bias is a consistent theme that authors highlight when justifying the LDA method.

4. How important are the choices in LDA topic modelling?
4.1 Experimental evidence
This section reports the results of five empirical experiments designed to assess the sensitivity of LDA topic model outcomes to implementation and interpretation decisions over which researchers exercise control and where judgement is therefore necessary.

4.1.1. Experiment 1: hyperparameter search and evaluation
Our first experiment tests how topic representation varies with choice of LDA model hyperparameters and evaluation method. We set discrete values for various parameters to assess the impact of parameter choices but limit complexity of the grid search. We restrict the optimal number of topics (K) to three options that reflect a broad topic representation (K=25, 35 and 50) and three options that generate a granular representation (K=100, 200 and 400). We choose high values for alpha (α=0.1, 0.5) and beta (β=0.01, 0.1) to capture the broad topic structure, and low values for alpha (α=0.005, 0.01) and beta (β=0.005, 0.01) to capture the granular structure. We also allow the ‘auto’ option for α and β so the models can revise these parameters automatically to reflect the empirical Bayesian update. Choices for α, β, and inference algorithm vary within our broad and granular topic structures.

Our parsimonious text preprocessing pipeline involves lowercasing text and removing numerical digits, non-ascii characters, single letter words, and stop words as defined by Loughran and McDonald’s genericLong plus domain specific stop words that do not make significant contribution to meaning in the analysis of UK annual report (see Appendix for details). We do not apply a stemmer or lemmatizer, or generate N-grams, at this point. We filter words based on document frequency, defined as the proportion of documents including the target word, and then flex our low frequency word filters for our broad and granular topic representations. Specifically, we apply a five percent low frequency filter for our broad topic representations, whereas we allow a one percent filter for the granular topic representations as words appearing in less than five percent of reports may serve as critical words for granular level topics. We allow our high frequency word filter to vary between 50 and 70 percent in both groups. The least aggressive filtering (i.e. one percent and 70 percent filtering) yields a corpus of 3.7 million tokens from 7,228 unique words while the most aggressive filtering (i.e. five percent and 50 percent filtering) yields 2.2 million tokens from 3,029 unique words. Applying these hyperparameter combinations and word filters leads to a final loose grid search across 120 LDA models.

We assess the relative performance rankings of our 120 LDA models to the following five evaluation metrics: perplexity, coherence, diversity, WIT, and granularity. We discard for ranking purposes all trained models that contain one or more empty topics on the grounds the model fails to generate meaningful semantic groups. An empty topic is one where all words are evenly distributed within the topic (near uniform distribution). Our proxy for a uniform topic distribution is where the difference between the sum of top 10-word probabilities and the sum of bottom 10-word probabilities is less than 0.001. Fifty out of the 60 gensim models contain at least one unidentified topic. Results for Experiment 1 therefore involve a final set of 70 trained models, comprising 60 mallet models and 10 genism models.

Results for Experiment 1 are striking on several counts. First, no single combination of hyperparameter choices ranks among the top five models on all five evaluation metrics. Indeed, only three models rank in the top five for more than one evaluation metric: (G_0.05_0.5_25_auto_auto) for coherence and diversity; (M_0.05_0.7_25_auto_auto) for coherence and WIT; and (M_0.01_0.5_400_auto_auto) for granularity and topic coverage. Notably, while M_0.01_0.5_400_auto_auto ranks in the top five for both granularity and topic coverage, and M_0.01_0.5_400_0.01_0.01 ranks in the top five for granularity, both models still appear among the bottom five under the WIT metric.

Focusing on the top-ranking model for each evaluation metric, our second key insight from the analysis is that the number of topics (K) varies from 25 using the diversity metric to 400 using the granularity and topic coverage metrics. The notion of an unambiguously optimal value for K that the LDA algorithm ‘discovers’ objectively without researcher input is therefore a myth. Instead, a wide range of feasible topic representations of the corpus exist, with the final choice likely to depend to a large degree on the precise nature of the research question(s) under investigation. Collectively, results highlight the sensitivity of LDA topic model outcomes to choice of hyperparameters and evaluation approach, both of which require significant researcher judgement.

Panel B reports correlations in model ranking by evaluation metrics. Correlations reveal the key role that evaluation scoring methods can have on model choice. While evaluations using coherence, diversity and WIT are most closely aligned, the metrics are not perfect substitutes with correlations ranging from a high of 0.75 (diversity and WIT) to a low of 0.55 (coherence and WIT for raw scores). Further, these three evaluation metrics display negative correlations with granularity and topic coverage that range from −0.15 (coherence and granularity for raw scores) to −0.94 (diversity and topic coverage for raw scores). Results illustrate how metrics such as coherence and diversity favour coarser topic representations whereas granularity and topic coverage favour narrower topic representations. In the absence of any theoretically preferred evaluation method or combination thereof, the final choice rests with the researcher and the nature of the research question, and it is possible that the question may necessitate multiple representations.

4.1.2. Experiment 2: interpretation using visualisation
Inter-topic distance maps visualise the gap between topics in a latent space. These visualisations supplement traditional quantitative evaluation metrics and provide a valuable (subjective) tool for selecting between LDA models. A promising model features well-separated topics, indicating each one is capturing a distinct theme. Evidence of significant overlap suggests redundancy or that the topics are not sufficiently distinct (i.e. undercooked). Our second experiment provides a simple illustration of this complementary visualisation tool in action. We proceed by choosing at random one of the top performing models from Experiment 1. The model we select has parameters [M_0.05_0.5_35_auto_auto] and ranks first on coherence score among all 120 models.

Several topics display significant overlap. The accompanying keyword table provides the top 10 keywords for these topics. Keyword lists include common unigrams such as ‘banking’, ‘loan’, and ‘stage’, making the four topics hard to interpret and distinguish. The visualisation confirms that a high coherence score does not automatically guarantee topics that are interpretationally distinctive. One strategy open to researchers where significant overlaps occur in a high scoring model is to consider alternative models with parameter combinations that generate fewer overlapping clusters. Despite its lower evaluation score, the topics in this model display less overlap and may therefore be practically more interpretable. An alternative strategy is to aggregate similar topics by summing probabilities across the overlapping topics (Hu et al. Citation2014). For example, one could sum probabilities for overlapping topics to form a combined topic that nests the four overlapping topics. Ultimately, however, the final decision over which approach yields the best topic representation will require researchers to exercise judgement based on the research question and their domain expertise.

4.1.3. Experiment 3: multiword expressions
This experiment examines the impact of MWEs on topic representations. We assess impact by first creating a new version of our baseline corpus that captures two – and three-word phrases as an additional step in the text preprocessing pipeline. We automate the process of identifying n-grams using genism’s ‘phrases’ function, which follows Mikolov’s et al. (Citation2013) approach to generating MWEs based on the collocation of two consecutive words. We recursively apply this method to our corpus to generate bigrams and trigrams. Next, we apply spaCy POS tagging to help retain meaningful collocations by filtering on interpretable language structures (Bhalla and Klimcikova Citation2019). Specifically, we retain bigrams with the structure (Noun, Noun) or (Adjective, Noun), and trigrams with the structure (Adjective/Noun, Anything, Adjective/Noun). We replace white spaces with underscores (_) in the set of filtered n-grams to convert them to unigrams. For example, instances of the bigram ‘risk management’ in the original corpus are replaced by ‘risk_management’ in the updated corpus. This process generates 533 MWEs that we represent as unigrams. The list of MWEs is available in the Appendix and a cursory review suggests they reflect meaningful phrases in risk disclosures. Finally, we remove high frequency tokens (appearing in >50 percent of documents) and low frequency tokens (appearing in < five percent of documents).

Our experimental design evaluates whether inclusion of MWEs affects the number of topics the LDA model discovers and the interpretation of discovered topics. We start by identifying a baseline model. We follow Experiment 2 and use the top-ranking model from Experiment 1 by coherence score [M_0.05_0.5_35_auto_auto]. Next, we train six new versions of this model using the new MWE corpus, allowing the number of topics to vary (K=25, 35, 50, 100, 200, 400) while fixing all other parameters. Finally, we use three approaches to assess whether inclusion of MWEs affects the topic representation: we compare evaluation scores for the six new models with the evaluation score for the baseline model; we compute the proportion of topics containing at least one MWE; and we compare the semantic similarity of the 35-topic baseline model with the comparable 35-topic version estimated with the MWE corpus.

With the exception of coherence, where the baseline model continues to display the highest score, all other metrics display higher evaluation scores for at least one of the six MWE models. Overall, 19 of the 30 evaluation scores for models estimated with the MWE corpus (63%) exceed the relevant baseline model. The scale of the improvement in scores is also material, ranging from 4% for granularity to 84% for topic coverage. Note, however, that all five evaluation metrics also display a materially lower score for at least one MWE model, suggesting that the performance benefits of including MWEs are not universally positive. Results nevertheless support our core thesis that the decision on whether or not work with n-grams is likely to matter, and that the final choice regarding the optimal approach is likely to be context-specific.

As further evidence on the potential importance of MWEs for LDA topic representations, more than 50 percent of topics for all six models contain at least one MWE among the top 10 top keywords. Findings provide further evidence that restricting LDA models to consider only unigrams is likely to impact topic properties.

Our final test assesses whether inclusion of MWEs leads to a material change in topic labels. Specifically, we hold all model parameters constant at [M_0.05_0.5_35_auto_auto] and test whether topic labels change conditional on the treatment of MWEs. We interpret evidence of a material change in labels as an indication that the treatment of MWEs matters for interpretability. We assign topic labels using GPT4o to minimise implementation costs and the risk of bias from human coders in labelling process. Finally, we use GPT to identify semantically similar topic labels between the 35-topic baseline model and the equivalent 35-topic model estimated with the MWE corpus. Findings (not tabulated for parsimony) reveal that GPT clusters 26 topics (74%) from the baseline model and 27 topics (77%) from the MWE model together as being semantically similar based on their labels. Eight semantically different topics (23%) are nevertheless evident in the MWE model, while nine topics (26%) in the baseline model disappear. While some of these differences may be attributable to the inherent stochastic nature of topic modelling (e.g. rerunning the same model with a different random seed), the emergence of new multiword topics provides additional evidence that explicitly capturing MWEs can alter topic representations in material ways.

4.1.4. Experiment 4: stemming
Stemming and lemmatisation help to reduce dimensionality in the term document matrix and potentially improve interpretability. We follow the same approach as in Experiment 3 but with stemming replacing MWE construction in the preprocessing pipeline. Specifically, use the top ranking model from Experiment 1 by coherence score [M_0.05_0.5_35_auto_auto] as our baseline and then we train the same six LDA models as in Experiment 3 (K=25, 35, 50, 100, 200, 400) on a new version of the baseline corpus where we apply the Porter stemmer (NLTK PorterStemmer) as an additional step in the text preprocessing pipeline. We then repeat the same analysis as described in Experiment 3 after substituting the stemmed corpus for the MWE corpus. The baseline corpus includes 2.2 million tokens from 3,029 unique words, whereas the stemmed corpus contains 1.5 million tokens from 1,709 unique words.

Results provide a mixed picture. Scores for coherence and WIT are lower than the baseline model across all six versions using the stemmed corpus. In addition, holding the number of topics constant at 35, evaluation scores for all metrics with the exception of granularity are lower for the model using the stemmed corpus than for the baseline model estimated with the unstemmed corpus. The decrease in performance suggests that stemming may merge semantically distinct words, leading to noisier topics. On the other hand, 11 of the 30 evaluation scores for models estimated with the stemmed corpus (37%) exceed the relevant baseline model. Results therefore provide some evidence that stemming can increase model performance, although the potential benefits appear to be less pronounced than the case for MWEs. The overall message is nevertheless consistent with that for MWEs; the decision whether or not to include stemming in the text preprocessing pipeline is likely to have a material impact on LDA topic representation. Researchers therefore need to approach the choice with care and transparency. Conducting robustness tests with and without stemming may also be helpful given the mixed results.

We also assess whether stemming leads to a material change in topic labels. Our test follows the approach described in Experiment 3. We hold all model parameters constant at [M_0.05_0.5_35_auto_auto] and test whether topic labels change conditional on stemming strategy. We assign topic labels using GPT4o and we also use GPT to identify semantically similar topic labels between the 35-topic baseline model and the equivalent 35-topic model estimated with the stemmed corpus. We interpret evidence of a material change in labels as an indication that the treatment of stemming matters for interpretability. Findings (not tabulated) reveal that GPT clusters 31 topics (89%) from the baseline model and 32 topics (91%) from the stemmed model together as being semantically similar based on their labels. Three semantically different topics (9%) are nevertheless evident in the stemmed model, while four topics (11%) in the baseline model disappear. We note that some portion of the observed differences may be due to the stochastic nature of LDA. Nevertheless, the consistent emergence (or disappearance) of specific topics when stemming is (or is not) applied suggests that stemming decisions can influence topic labels, although the effect appears weaker than that documented for MWEs. Accordingly, we encourage researchers to explore the effects in their own corpus rather than relying mechanically on our findings.

4.1.5. Experiment 5: labelling strategy
Our final experiment evaluates the sensitivity of topic labels to the labelling strategy. The labelling process is independent of the LDA algorithm and is entirely reliant on researcher judgement. Our test involves selecting a baseline LDA model and assessing if and how labels vary for the following four labelling strategies: (1) manual labelling by one researcher working independently; (2) manual labelling by three researchers working as a group; (3) GPT4o labelling using a naïve prompt lacking domain expertise; and (4) GPT4o labelling with a chain-of-thought (CoT) prompt that incorporates significant domain expertise. Two of the co-authors working together developed the CoT prompt through several iterations based on their knowledge of the UK risk reporting guidance and risk categories.

Our baseline LDA model is [M_0.05_0.5_35_0.1_0.01]. We select this model because we have FRC input on manually assigned labels from a separate project. We assess whether labels assigned using the four methods differ materially, and whether method (3) that limits researcher discretion generates unambiguously more informative labels than the remaining three methods that permit subjectivity in varying degrees.

A number of labels vary materially between those assigned by a single co-author and those assigned by three co-authors working as a team. Examples include topic 4 (Scenario analysis vs. Banking), topic 12 (Insurance liability management vs. Insurance), topic 14 (Auditing & compliance vs. Reporting & audit), topic 20 (Legal risk & compliance vs. Regulations), topic 22 (Client solutions vs. Undefined), topic 28 (Credit management vs. Banking), topic 32 (Loan portfolio management vs. Banking), and topic 33 (Trading exposures and asset limits vs. Security trading). Results reveal that different manual labelling strategies generate different topic labels, which in turn may affect inferences and conclusions.

Several points are worthy of note regarding GPT labels. First, GPT labels appear credible judged against the top 10 keywords and the labels assigned by human experts. This is potentially important for granular representations of the topic space (e.g. >100) where human coding may prove prohibitively costly. Second, the labels that GPT assigns tend to provide richer topic descriptions, which may lead to more refined insights and conclusions. Building on this point, we also see material semantic differences between labels that humans assign and those that GPT assigns. For example, while human coders label topic 9 as Property portfolio management, GPT CoT assigns the label Debt covenants & property risks. Meanwhile, human coders label topic 2 as Banking whereas both GPT prompts reference impairments; and human coders agree that topic 20 reflects Risk appetite whereas both GPT prompts generate labels that reference cybersecurity risks directly.

Finally, comparing the GPT naïve and CoT prompts highlights material differences. For example, the CoT label for topic 5 references culture risks whereas the naïve label does not. Similarly, the CoT label for topic 15 references remuneration risks whereas the naïve label does not. Results demonstrate that prompting strategy can impact topic semantics materially when using LLMs for labelling, and more specifically that building prompts that exploit domain expertise can lead to richer topic descriptions. Our findings provide no support for the view that restricting researcher judgement leads to more reliable labelling. Overall, results from Experiment 5 highlight the sensitivity of topic labels and associated economic insights to the choice of labelling strategy. Labelling is a critical step in the topic modelling process that researchers must approach with appropriate thought and care.

4.2 Summary and implications
Results from our five experiments reveal the impact of researcher choice, whether implicit or explicit, on the LDA topic modelling process. Contrary to popular claims, discovering topics using the LDA algorithm is a nuanced process that requires researchers to exercise careful and informed judgement, and provide full transparency on all aspects of the modelling pipeline. In this respect, the process is similar in many ways to a manual coding exercise. Both approaches are capable of generating important insights when they are applied correctly; but both approaches are also capable of providing spurious findings when the implementation lacks sufficient care, understanding, and transparency. The added concern with quantitative methods like LDA is that there is greater scope for obscuring researcher discretion and its impact behind a veil of pseudo-rigour (El Haj et al. Citation2019).

Unfortunately, findings from our experiments do not provide simple, mechanical solutions for researchers to apply as part of an ‘analysis-by-numbers’ approach to text mining. As a result, the task of discovering topics in a corpus of financial documents is a process of ‘art’ as much as ‘science’. This challenge mirrors broader issues in empirical research, where even seemingly straightforward analyses can produce varying results across different researchers working with identical data (Menkveld et al. Citation2024). Our experiments do, however, shine a light on some of the key decisions that researchers need to address and explain when applying LDA. We draw on these insights to propose a checklist for authors and readers to follow when implementing and interpreting LDA topic modelling. Failure by researchers to reference and explain each item in the checklist casts a cloud over the reliability of results and conclusions in our view.

5. Beyond LDA: leveraging language models
While our primary analysis focuses on LDA, recent advances in transformer architectures have enabled language-model-based topic modelling approaches that use semantic text embeddings rather than bag-of-words counts. Transformer/embedding-based approaches such as BERTopic (Grootendorst Citation2022) represent a new generation of topic modelling that leverages transformer architectures (Vaswani et al. Citation2017) to generate semantic text embeddings that contextualise words and provide meaning. The semantic nature of approaches such as BERTopic represents a significant conceptual advancement over the BoW approach and probabilistic nature of LDA.

In these new generation models, documents are first transformed into high-dimensional embedding vectors using models such as BERT (Devlin et al. Citation2019) or other text transformers (Reimers and Gurevych Citation2019). The resulting high-dimensional embeddings are then subjected to a dimensionality reduction process such as UMAP (McInnes et al. Citation2018), followed by density-based clustering using an algorithm such as HDBSCAN (Campbell et al. Citation2014) to identify coherent groups of semantically similar documents. Unlike LDA, which assigns probabilities of multiple topics to each document, BERTopic assigns each document to a single cluster and therefore a single topic (Grootendorst Citation2022). However, this conceptual limitation may be circumvented for topic-rich documents such as annual reports, earnings announcements, analyst reports, etc. by segmenting documents into sentences or paragraphs before the embedding step to permit multiple density clusters to occur within a document. Each density cluster is then named by extracting distinguishing terms (words and phrases) as topic representations using a ranking process like class-based TF-IDF (c-TF-IDF). As a final step, these topic representations may then be further enhanced or replaced entirely using a generative LLM (e.g. GPT).

The appeal of embedding-based approaches to modelling topics lies in their potential to capture more subtle semantic relationships and contextual understanding inherent in the text, yielding topics that are more coherent or interpretable than those derived from count-based models such as LDA (Bianchi et al. Citation2021, Grootendorst Citation2022, Wu et al. Citation2024). El-Haj et al. (Citation2020) discuss the dearth of semantic approaches to text processing in accounting and finance research, and the limitations this imposes on analyses and insights. Methods such as BERTopic therefore offer significant potential for our discipline. A small group of papers in accounting and finance use BERT but its application to topic modelling remains unexplored in the domain (Siano and Wysocki Citation2021, Bingler et al. Citation2022, Huang et al. Citation2023, Koelbel et al. Citation2024).

The key question in the context of our study is whether advanced language-model techniques for modelling topics reduce or remove the need for researcher judgement inherent in LDA. The answer is no. Instead, these methods introduce a new suite of methodological decision points that can influence the resultant thematic representations. In the case of BERTopic, these critical choices include (but are not limited to): (a) choice of the foundational embedding model, as different models are trained on diverse corpora and capture varying semantic nuances (Reimers and Gurevych Citation2019, Jehnen et al. Citation2025); (b) parameterisation of the dimensionality reduction stage (e.g. parameters such as n_components, min_dist, and n_neighbors in UMAP) (McInnes et al. Citation2018); and (c) settings for the clustering algorithm (e.g. min_cluster_size and min_samples in HDBSCAN) (Campbell et al. Citation2014). Each of these decisions, like the preprocessing steps and hyperparameter tuning choices in LDA, require careful consideration and justification as collectively they determine the granularity, coherence, and ultimate interpretation of the discovered topics. Also akin to the LDA case, the importance of these choices can be easily missed, ignored, or obscured by researchers when presenting their findings.

We provide evidence on the sensitivity of BERTopic results to key parameter choices by repeating Experiment 1 (section 4.1). Our focus is on understanding the impact on results of researcher discretion over key parameter choices in the modelling pipeline. To understand the impact on evaluation metric, we tabulate the top and bottom five BERTopic models based on rankings of coherence score, diversity, granularity, WIT accuracy, and topic coverage.

5.1 BERTopic parameters
We demonstrate the importance of mindful parameter choices by selecting a parsimonious set of values for a subset of key parameters. The five key parameters whose values we flex are the embedding model, number of topics, n_neighbors in the UMAP dimensionality reduction algorithm, and min_cluster_size and min_samples in the HDBSCAN algorithm. We explore two language models: BERT (Devlin et al. Citation2019), the most widely-known language model introduced by Google, and GTE (Li et al. Citation2023), a recent and relatively lightweight language model built on BERT with advanced training techniques developed by Alibaba Group. We limit choice of the optimal number of topics (K) to four options that deliver a broad topic structure (K=Auto, 23, 35, and 50), and four options that generate a granular topic structure (K=Auto, 100, 200 and 400). For the BERT embedding model, we choose higher values of n_neighbors (30, 50), min_cluster_size (50, 100) and min_samples (50,100) to capture broad-level topic structures, and lower values of n_neighbors (10, 15), min_cluster_size (25, 50) and min_samples (1, 15) to capture granular level structures. For the GTE embedding model, we choose higher values of n_neighbors (50, 100), min_cluster_size (200, 400) and min_samples (100, 200) to capture broad-level topic structures, and lower values of n_neighbors (10, 50), min_cluster_size (100, 200) and min_samples (1, 50) to capture granular level structures. These parameter options result in 159 model combinations. The naming convention for our topic models follows the format [LanguageModel_Nneighbors_ MinClusterSize_MinSamples _TopicNumber].

The results clearly demonstrate the critical role of parameter selection in shaping the final topic model. Even with modern embedding-based approaches like BERTopic, the process of parameter tuning remains as crucial as it is for traditional BoW methods like LDA. The substantial variance in scores between the best and worst performing models for each metric reinforces this conclusion. For example, coherence scores range from 0.764 down to 0.486, while WIT accuracy reveal even larger variation, from 0.880 to 0.239. This sensitivity shows that choices regarding the embedding model, UMAP neighbours, and HDBSCAN cluster size materially shape the quality and nature of the topic representation.

Consistent with findings for LDA, results also show that no single set of parameters is universally superior. A model specification that performs well on one metric can perform poorly on another. For instance, the [GTE_10_400_10_auto] model ranks in the top five for both coherence and diversity but fails to place in the top tier for any other metric. In contrast, several models achieve a perfect topic coverage score of 1.000 but do not rank highly on coherence or WIT accuracy. This trade-off across evaluation metrics highlights how the optimal parameter choices depend on the specific goals of the research project.

5.2 BERTopic vs LDA
To shed light on the performance of BERTopic relative to LDA, we tabulate the top five BERTopic and LDA topic models based on rankings of coherence score, diversity, granularity, WIT accuracy, and topic coverage.

Coherence scores of embedding-based models consistently outperform LDA models, with coherence scores reaching up to 0.764 compared to LDA's highest score of 0.649. Results indicate that language-based models generate topics with more semantically consistent keywords, likely due to their ability to capture more nuanced contextual relationships between words. Diversity scores for both LDA and language-based models are similar (0.832 for LDA vs. 0.812 for BERT-based models). Our evidence suggests that LDA performs marginally better at generating a variety of distinct topics. Granularity scores show LDA models outperforming language-based models, with the highest LDA score at 0.730 compared to 0.619 for LLM-based models. Conversely, WIT accuracy of LLM models shows superior performance (0.880 for GTE-based models versus 0.700 for LDA), indicating that topics generated by language-based models are more interpretable since GPT finds it easier to identify intruder words. Finally, all top LLM-based models achieve perfect scores of 1.000 for topic coverage, confirming their effectiveness in covering predefined topics comprehensively. The highest score for LDA models is 0.972.

Results show how replacing the BoW assumption inherent in LDA with semantic analysis can lead to more coherent and interpretable topic representations for embedding-based models. Nevertheless, our analysis indicates that embedding-based topic models are not universally superior. Embedding-based pipelines demand substantial computational resources and may underperform if the pretrained embedding model is poorly matched to a domain. These new generation models also introduce many hyperparameters (UMAP, HDBSCAN, etc.) where the tuning materially affects outcomes. By contrast, LDA is computationally lighter, captures document-level topic mixtures by construction, and yields document-topic probabilities that are straightforward to use in downstream regression analyses (Blei et al. Citation2003). Overall, our analysis yields two important takeaways. First, accounting and finance researchers should not treat LDA as the default topic modelling method for their analyses, although in some scenarios the approach may still represent a viable choice. Second, moving to the new generation of embedding-based models does not obviate the need for researchers to make active and informed implementation choices.

6. Applied evidence for risk reporting
We conclude our analysis with a demonstration of the impact of LDA implementation choices on insights for FTSE350 firms’ annual report risk disclosures. Reflecting FRC concerns over reporting quality, we focus on the themes that risk-related disclosures cover and the propensity for generic ‘boilerplate’ commentary.

6.1 Topic coverage and alignment with FRC expectations
We evaluate risk reporting content using two high-scoring LDA models from Experiment 1: a parsimonious 50-topic model (M_0.05_0.5_50_auto_auto) and a granular 100-topic model (M_0.01_0.7_100_auto_auto). We apply GPT CoT labelling and map outputs from both models against 36 risk categories derived from FRC guidance.

The 50-topic model reveals that 92% of the LDA topics map directly to expected regulatory categories. However, only 24 of the 36 risks from the FRC-defined list (67%) emerge as distinct topics, with notable gaps in supply chain risks (particularly supplier due diligence), human resource risks (particularly cultural risks and human rights issues), and operational risks related to natural disasters and catastrophes. The dominant risk categories include Market Risks, Compliance Risks, and Financial Risks, with substantial industry clustering that reflects the FTSE350's sectoral composition rather than universal risk concerns.

The 100-topic model exposes nuanced risk differentiation not visible in the broader 50-topic model, resulting in 75% coverage of FRC-defined topics (27 of 36). Where the 50-topic model identifies a single ‘Health & Safety’ risk category, the 100-topic model distinguishes between student safety, public transport safety, workplace safety, and multiple other contexts. Similarly, credit risks expand from five general topics to 14 specialised areas including corporate solvency, interest rate exposure, and commercial lending practices. Nevertheless, even this more granular representation fails to capture key risks like Human Rights and Cybersecurity Threats adequately. Findings point to systematic gaps in UK risk reporting regardless of analytical granularity.

6.2 Are risk disclosures characterised by boilerplating?
The FRC perceives bland commentary discussing generic risks as a key threat to the usefulness of risk reporting for investors and other stakeholders (FRC Citation2022, FRC Lab Citation2021). We use the distribution of LDA topic intensity across annual reports to assess whether the content and focus of FTSE350 firms’ risk disclosures vary in ways consistent with informative commentary. We use Hierarchical Linear Modelling [HLM] (Raudenbush and Bryk Citation2002) to measure variation in topic intensity. We use this method to test whether risk reporting contains meaningful firm-, sector – and time-specific content versus generic and invariant boilerplate commentary.

We use the 35-topic model as the baseline for this analysis. The 35-topic model suggests risk reporting is largely static: permanent industry differences explain 25% of variation, time-invariant firm characteristics account for 48%, while dynamic firm-level variation that arguably offers most value to investors, account for only 27%. This pattern suggests that FRC concern about boilerplating is valid (FRC Citation2022, FRC Lab Citation2021). The 100-topic model nevertheless reverses this conclusion entirely. Dynamic firm-level variation accounts for 73% of topic intensity variation, with permanent industry effects dropping to just 5%. These results suggest firms actively tailor risk commentary to their evolving circumstances, contradicting the boilerplate conclusion apparent with our coarser model.

Taken together, these results reinforce the paper’s central message: implementation choices shape the substantive conclusions drawn from topic models. In the case of selecting the ‘optimal’ level of topic granularity, for example, the final decision is likely to pivot on the precise nature of the research objective: aggregate representations may better capture first-order risk categories and industry patterns, while granular models reveal firm-specific nuances that might otherwise appear homogeneous.

7. Discussion and conclusions
The popularity of text mining using LDA topic modelling is growing among accounting researchers. The LDA algorithm provides a powerful and relatively accessible tool for describing large financial corpora and categorising individual documents within these corpora. A prevailing view amongst accounting (and finance) researchers is that the algorithmic nature of LDA also promises significant research design benefits in the form of less researcher subjectivity and higher levels of replicability. Indeed, our literature review suggests that the method is frequently portrayed as providing both a tool for mining large volumes of text and a solution for minimising the effect of researcher-induced bias.

We review the LDA method and demonstrate numerous implementation aspects that require researchers to apply significant judgements, either implicitly or explicitly. In many ways, the degree of discretion involved in discovering topics with LDA is no different to that required for manual content analysis. The key difference, however, is that researcher choices for LDA are often hidden and their effects overlooked. Our review of LDA applications in the accounting and finance literature confirms that researchers often fail to discuss key design choices when applying the method. We conjecture that this is because the choices are often implicit and not well understood (e.g. relying on default settings in the coding step or on choices made in extant work). Having highlighted the various decisions that researchers need to address we proceed to provide evidence on the effects of (some of) these choices via a series of experiments where we use LDA to discover topics in risk disclosures made by FTSE350 firms during the period 2018-2022. Findings from our experiments confirm that LDA topic model results can be extremely sensitive to implementation choices. Crucially, these decisions extend beyond the LDA algorithm to include the properties of the input text and the labelling strategy for assigning meaning to topics.

Our analysis extends beyond LDA to consider recent advances in embedding-based topic models. We find these newer approaches, such as BERTopic, can generate more coherent and interpretable topics by leveraging semantic embeddings to relax the bag-of-words assumption inherent in LDA. While not universally superior across all evaluation metrics, the evidence suggests that LDA should no longer be viewed as the default topic modelling method for accounting and finance research. Importantly, however, these advanced methods do not eliminate the need for researcher discretion; instead, they introduce a new suite of critical implementation choices related to embedding models, dimensionality reduction, and clustering that must be carefully considered and justified.

There is no recipe book for dealing with these choices. The ‘correct’ choice often depends on the research setting and the research question(s) under investigation. Even then, researchers are likely to face a range of plausible representations of the latent topic space. The good news is that the high degree of ambiguity provides the opportunity for domain expertise to elevate the analysis from a purely mechanical task to a process where accounting researchers can exploit their comparative advantage. Accordingly, we argue that researcher discretion in topic modelling is a feature that accounting researchers should be celebrating rather than downplaying.

We apply the lessons from our experiments to study the properties of FTSE350 firms’ annual report risk disclosures. Two competing models comprising 35 and 100 topics that both display high evaluation scores produce quite different insights. While results using the 35-topic representation suggest very high levels of stale, generic content, findings using the 100-topic representation indicate that annual report risk disclosures provide the type of dynamic content that investors seek. Precisely which conclusion is correct depends on how one frames the research question, defines a material risk, and ultimately implements the chosen model.