Amazon Prime Video
Originals, movies, TV, sports
3M RATINGS

4.8
*****

AWARDS
Editorsʼ
Choice
Apps

AGE RATING

13+
In-App Controls

CHART

#9
Entertainment

DEVELOPER

AMZN Mobile LLC

LANGUAGE

EN
+ 30 More

SIZE

307.8
MB

Watch movies, TV shows, live programming, and sports including Amazon MGM Studios-produced series and movies Road House, The Lord of
the Rings: The Rings of Power, Fallout, Reacher, The Boys, and The Idea of You, and much more. Browse titles, search for your favorites, or enjoy
movies and shows recommended just for you.

App features:
. Download videos to watch anywhere.
. Rent or buy new-release movies and popular TV shows (availability varies by marketplace).
. Cast from your phone or tablet to the big screen with Chromecast.
. Create multiple profiles so each person gets a personalized entertainment experience.
. Go behind the scenes of movies and TV shows with exclusive X-Ray access, powered by IMDb (availability varies by marketplace).

Enjoy Prime Video updates on your Apple TV or Mac by downloading the latest app from the App Store on your device. This requires an Apple TV
3rd generation or later, and for Mac, macOS Big Sur 11.4 or later.

If you subscribe to Prime Video via iTunes (where available), payment is charged to your iTunes Account at confirmation of purchase and your
membership automatically renews monthly unless auto-renewal is turned off at least 24 hours before the end of the then current plan period.
Your account is charged for renewal within 24 hours before the end of each plan period at the rate of your selected plan. Manage your
subscription and turn off auto-renewal anytime by going to My Account or through iTunes.

For customers located within the European Union, United Kingdom or Brazil: By using this app, you agree to the Amazon Conditions of Use and
the Prime Video Terms of Use at primevideo.com/ww-av-legal-home. See our Privacy Notice, Cookies Notice and Interest-Based Ads Notice at
primevideo.com/ww-av-legal-home.

For all other customers: By using this app, you agree to the Amazon Conditions of Use, Privacy Notice, and and the Prime Video Terms of Use at
primevideo.com/ww-av-legal-home.

Events

NOW AVAILABLE

NOW AVAILABLE

NOW AVAILABLE

BRIAR
44

PREMIERE
Spider-Noir
Nicolas Cage is Spider-Noir - streaming May 2 ...

PREMIERE
Every Year After
Based on Every Summer After by Carley Fortun ...

PREMIERE
Off Campus
Love wasn't in the playbook. Enemies to lovers, ...

Ratings & Reviews >

4.8
out of 5

3M Ratings

Editors' Choice

Convinced you've run out of things to watch? Amazon Prime Video may be able to prove
otherwise. The app is brimming with brilliant films, dramas, and comedies, as well as
sports and children's TV, all available to watch on demand. We love the ultra-high-quality
4K streaming and the slick UI. Oh, and the ability to create multiple user profiles and
download series to watch later. There are also hundreds of Amazon Originals to check
out-great series and films produced by Amazon Studios that you won't find anywhere
else.

Good app.

01/28/2025
Sunthebun1

I use the free version of the service and it is a good app for that. Being able to watch free
live channels and free on demand shows is what makes it good. However there's a couple
issues that need to be addressed. Mostly with episode numbers and playback issue.
There are some shows that you can't list as episode 1 for each season. For example the
on demand episodes of The Price Is Right the Barker era channel you have it listed as
episode 1 for season 11. That's incorrect. The first 5 episodes of season 11 were skipped
and begins with episode 6. 10 episodes are actually missing from that season due to the
channel skipping those episodes. Therefore they should be listed as the production
numbers. Episodes 4581 through episode 4985. As far as the playback goes episodes
4581 and 4582 are played twice for on demand viewing. Where episodes 4851 and 4852
are supposed to be played it plays episodes 4581 and 4582. Or in the way you have
these episodes listed instead of episodes 130 and 131 are supposed to be playing it plays
episodes 1 and 2 for the 2nd time. Please look at those episodes and find the 2 episodes
that are supposed to be playing on demand and get them corrected. Don't forget to list
them in the right way that I mentioned in this lengthy review. Thank you.

Fix my subtitles so they stay on !!!

04/28/2023
Selynyx

I could care less about the new format and look, but subtitles are messed up now. It used
to be that movies and shows would always play with subtitles because I turned them on.
Now every time I watch something, I have to turn subtitles back on, even if it's the same
movie that I just started earlier that day. If you're going to make it that subtitles are
automatically off, then at least make it a setting option to have them automatically on vs
automatically off. I'm someone that uses subtitles all the time, and I've never had to turn
them back on for the same movie every time I re-open the app and press resume. Every
other streaming app and previously prime video too, if you turn subtitles on once for one
movie or show, they stay on for everything until you turn them back off. That's how it
used to be and that is better. Now I have to hit pause, turn subtitles on, go back 10-30
seconds, then I can resume my movie with subtitles on. At least make an option in
settings to have subtitles automatically on or off, plus the ability to change it for an
individual movie or show. Also it's buffering and lagging more than before. In my case, it
could be the area I'm in bc I have no wifi and most places have poor cell service, but
prime video is still acting up more than any other streaming apps I use. I've never had any
issues before, and if subtitles worked properly, I would give it a 5 star rating. But I use
subtitles all the time and now I'm annoyed and irritated every time I start a movie or tv
show. Fix them please, they worked fine before.

What's New >

Bug fixes and performance improvements

App Privacy >

The developer, AMZN Mobile LLC, indicated that the app's privacy practices may include handling of data as described below. For more
information, see the developer's privacy policy.

Purchases

Location

User Content

Identifiers

Diagnostics

i

Data Linked to You

The following data may be collected and
linked to your identity:

Financial Info

Contact Info

Search History

Jsage Data

Other Data

Privacy practices may vary, for example, based on the features you use or your age. Learn More

Accessibility

The developer has not yet indicated which accessibility features this app supports. Learn More

Accessibility

The developer has not yet indicated which accessibility features this app supports. Learn More

Information

Seller
AMZN Mobile LLC

Compatibility
Requires iOS 17.0 or later. V

In-App Purchases
Yes v

Size

307.8 MB

Languages
English and 30 more V

Copyright
@ Copyright 2026 Amazon.com and its affiliates.

Category
Entertainment

Age Rating
13+ v